AP® European History 2006 Scoring Guidelines Form B The College Board: Connecting Students to College Success The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 5,000 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves seven million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. College Board, AP Central, APCD, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Vertical Teams, Pre-AP, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. Admitted Class Evaluation Service, CollegeEd, connect to college success, MyRoad, SAT Professional Development, SAT Readiness Program, and Setting the Cornerstones are trademarks owned by the College Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Board and National Merit Scholarship Corporation. All other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.com. Question 1—Document-Based Question Analyze the ways in which national and cultural identity in Alsace-Lorraine were perceived and promoted during the period from 1870 to 1919. BASIC CORE: 1 point each to a total of 6 points 1. Provides an appropriate, explicitly stated, thesis that directly addresses all parts of the question. Thesis may not simply restate the question.    The thesis must suggest a minimal level of analysis or context (drawn from the documents). It need not appear in the first paragraph. 2. Discusses a majority of the documents individually and specifically. The student must use at least seven documents—even if used incorrectly—by reference to anything in the box. Documents cannot be referenced together in order to get credit for this point (e.g., “Documents 1, 4, and 6 suggest . . . ”). Documents need not be cited by number or by name.  3. Demonstrates understanding of the basic meaning of a majority of the documents (may misinterpret no more than one).   A student may not significantly misinterpret more than one document. A major misinterpretation is an incorrect analysis or one that leads to an inaccurate grouping or a false conclusion. 4. Supports the thesis with appropriate interpretations of a majority of the documents. The student must use at least seven documents, and the documents used in the body of the essay must provide support for the thesis. A student cannot earn this point if no credit was awarded for point 1 (appropriate thesis). 5. Analyzes point of view or bias in at least three documents. The student must make a reasonable effort to explain why a particular source expresses the stated view by • Relating authorial point of view to author’s place in society (motive, position, status, etc.), OR • Evaluating the reliability of the source, OR • Recognizing that different kinds of documents serve different purposes, OR • Analyzing the tone of the documents; must be well developed. Note: Attribution alone is not sufficient to earn credit for point of view. Question 1 (continued) 6. Analyzes documents by explicitly organizing them in at least three appropriate groups. A group must contain at least two documents that are used correctly. Groupings and corresponding documents (not inclusive) may include the following:  Politicians 1, 3, 5, 7, 8 Published 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 Germans 1, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10 Official documents 2, 3, 6 Chronological groupings Speeches: 2, 5, 7 Alsatians 2, 5, 7, 11, 12 Memoirs/autobiographies 11, 12 EXPANDED CORE: 0–3 points to a total of 9 points Expands beyond the basic core of 1–6. The basic score of 6 must be achieved before a student can earn expanded core points. Examples: • Has a clear, analytical, and comprehensive thesis. • Uses all or almost all of the documents (11–12 documents).  • Uses the documents persuasively as evidence. • Shows understanding of nuances of the documents. • Analyzes point of view or bias in at least four documents cited in the essay. • Analyzes the documents in additional ways/additional groupings or other. • Brings in relevant “outside” information.  Question 2 How and to what extent did the Commercial Revolution transform the European economy and diplomatic balance of power in the period from 1650 to 1763? 9–6: Stronger These essays will illustrate the following qualities with varying degrees of effectiveness. • Has a clear, well-developed thesis. • Is well organized. • Supports the thesis with specific evidence. • May contain minor errors; even a 9 need not be flawless. Indicators for 9–8 • Has a balanced discussion of BOTH economics and diplomacy of the era. • Specifically addresses the shifts in economy and diplomacy for the period. Indicators for 7–6 • May use additional examples outside the time period. • Demonstrates less balanced treatment of either economy or diplomatic balance of power. 5–4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic. • Responds to the question unevenly: task(s), evidence, chronology. • May contain errors, factual and/or interpretive. Indicators: • Mentions both economic and diplomatic aspects but develops only one. • Offers few specific examples of change relating to the Commercial Revolution. • May be very generalized with little chronological connection. 3–0: Weaker These essays demonstrate the following qualities to varying degrees.  • Thesis is confused, unfocused, absent, or simply restates the question. • Misconstrues the question, or omits major tasks. • May contain major errors. Indicators for 3–2 • May completely ignore one of the question’s tasks (economy or diplomacy). • Contains vague/incorrect statements about the Commercial Revolution and economic/diplomatic effects. Indicators for 1–0 • May attempt to address the question but fails to do so. • May not contain specific evidence. • May contain serious errors. Question 3 Describe and analyze economic policies in Eastern and Western Europe after 1945. 9–6: Stronger These essays will illustrate the following qualities with varying degrees of effectiveness. • Has a clear, well-developed thesis. • Is well organized. • Supports the thesis with specific evidence. • May contain minor errors; even a 9 need not be flawless. Indicators for 9–8 • Correctly describes BOTH Eastern and Western European economic policies after 1945/World  War II. • Has a balanced analysis to both regions with several examples. Indicators for 7–6 • Has a less balanced approach (more on one region than the other). • Eastern economics may stress U.S.S.R. over other Eastern regions. 5–4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic. • Responds to the question unevenly: task(s), evidence, chronology. • May contain errors, factual and/or interpretive. Indicators: • Mentions both European areas but may develop only one sufficiently. • Offers little analysis in relation to the two policies. • May be very generalized with weak supporting evidence. 3–0: Weaker These essays demonstrate the following qualities to varying degrees.  • Thesis is confused, unfocused, or absent, or simply restates the question. • Misconstrues the question, or omits major tasks. • May contain major errors. Indicators for 3–2 • May completely ignore either one of the two regions’ economic policies. • May focus on political aspects of the Cold War or factors other than economics. Indicators for 1–0 • May attempt to answer the question but fails to do so. • Provides minimal or no evidence; may contain serious errors. Question 4 Analyze anti-Semitism in Europe from the Dreyfus affair in the 1890’s to 1939. 9–6: Stronger These essays will illustrate the following qualities with varying degrees of effectiveness. • Has a clear, well-developed thesis. • Is well organized. • Supports the thesis with specific evidence. • May contain minor errors; even a 9 need not be flawless. Indicators for 9–8 • Discusses anti-Semitism in Europe within the time limits given. • Covers the entire period using specific examples and analysis. Indicators for 7–6 • Covers Dreyfus and Hitler well but is less detailed on period in between. • Analysis is less specific. 5–4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic. • Responds to the question unevenly: task(s), evidence, chronology. • May contain errors, factual and/or interpretive. Indicators of 5–4 • May tend to discuss only Dreyfus and the Hitler-era and nothing in between. • Indicates an unclear understanding of the Dreyfus affair or the time frame. • May be very generalized with little chronological connection. 3–0: Weaker These essays demonstrate the following qualities to varying degrees.  • Thesis is confused, unfocused, or absent, or simply restates the question. • Misconstrues the question, or omits major tasks. • May contain major errors. Indicators of 3–2 • Mentions Dreyfus and Hitler with minimal analysis. • Demonstrates tendency to stress Holocaust (out of time frame). Indicators of 1–0 • May attempt to address the question but fails to do so. • May not contain specific evidence. • Contains serious errors in content or analysis. Question 5 How and to what extent did the methods and ideals of Renaissance humanism contribute to the Protestant Reformation? 9–6: Stronger These essays will illustrate the following qualities with varying degrees of effectiveness. • Has a clear, well-developed thesis. • Is well organized. • Supports the thesis with specific evidence. • May contain minor errors; even a 9 need not be flawless. Indicators of 9–8 • Discusses BOTH methods and ideals of Renaissance humanism and clearly establishes their impact on the Protestant Reformation. • Includes specific analytical examples that indicate a knowledge of both the methods and ideals of humanism. Indicators of 7–6 • Discusses both methods and ideals but is less balanced in approach. • Makes basic connections between humanism and the Reformation. 5–4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic. • Responds to the question unevenly: task(s), evidence, chronology. • May contain errors, factual and/or interpretive. Indicators of 5–4 • Mentions both methods and ideals of humanism but develops only one sufficiently. • May conflate the terms, methods, and ideals. • Offers fewer examples connecting the Renaissance to the Reformation. • May be imprecise or very generalized with little analytical clarity. 3–0: Weaker These essays demonstrate the following qualities to varying degrees.  • Thesis is confused, unfocused, or absent, or restates the question. • Misconstrues the question, or omits major tasks. • May contain major errors. Indicators of 3–2 • Makes minimal connection between the Renaissance and the Reformation or humanism. • Focuses almost solely on the Renaissance or the Reformation. Indicators of 0–1 • May attempt to address the question but fails to do so. • Is off task or may contain serious errors. • Is lacking in connection between the two movements. Question 6 Analyze the intellectual foundations of religious toleration in eighteenth-century Europe. 9–6: Stronger These essays will illustrate the following qualities with varying degrees of effectiveness. • Has a clear, well-developed thesis. • Is well organized. • Supports the thesis with specific evidence. • May contain minor errors; even a 9 need not be flawless. Indicators of 9–8 • Connects more than one intellectual concept to eighteenth-century religious toleration.  • Uses specific examples to analyze the connection between the two movements. Indicators of 7–6 • Clearly connects one major intellectual movement to eighteenth-century religious toleration. • Supports the connection with analytical evidence. 5–4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic. • Responds to the question unevenly: task(s), evidence, chronology. • May contain errors, factual and/or interpretive. Indicators of 5–4 • Describes the intellectual foundations of toleration with little analysis. • May treat an intellectual movement well but has minimal connection to its impact on religion. • Is generalized or imprecise with few specific examples. 3–0: Weaker These essays demonstrate the following qualities to varying degrees.  • Thesis is confused, unfocused, or absent, or simply restates the question. • Misconstrues the question, or omits major tasks. • May contain major errors. Indicators of 3–2 • Contains vague or incorrect statements about intellectual movements. • Demonstrates little awareness of the connection between intellectual ideas and toleration. Indicators of 0–1 • May attempt to address the question but fails to do so. • Misunderstands the definition of intellectual, foundation, or religious toleration, and composes an essay based on that misunderstanding. • Contains serious errors; provides minimal or no evidence. Question 7 Discuss how the two structures (Arch of Triumph, Paris, 1806–1836, and the Crystal Palace, London, 1850–1851) reflect the societies and cultures that produced them. 9–6: Stronger These essays will illustrate the following qualities with varying degrees of effectiveness. • Has a clear, well-developed thesis. • Is well organized. • Supports the thesis with specific evidence. • May contain minor errors; even a 9 need not be flawless. Indicators for 9–8 • Explains how each structure is reflective of BOTH the social and cultural environment of their era. • Has a balanced approach to both structures and to the environment. Indicators for 7–6 • May conflate the terms society and culture. • Less balanced explanation either on monuments or social/cultural explanations. 5–4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic. • Responds to the question unevenly: task(s), evidence, chronology. • May contain errors, factual and/or interpretive. Indicators of 5–4 • Mentions both monuments but effectively analyzes only one. • Offers little analysis of the monuments to society/culture. • Offers generalized information on society, culture, or monuments. 3–0: Weaker These essays demonstrate the following qualities to varying degrees.  • Thesis is confused, unfocused, or absent, or simply restates the question. • Misconstrues the question, or omits major tasks. • May contain major errors. Indicators of 3–2 • Contains vague statements about the monuments and their social/cultural environment. • Shows heavy dependence on mere description; minimal connection to question tasks. Indicators of 1–0 • May attempt to address the question but fails to do so. • Shows almost total dependence on description. • Includes serious errors that indicate no understanding of the eras or the monuments. 