AP® European History 2006 Scoring Guidelines The College Board: Connecting Students to College Success The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 5,000 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves seven million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. College Board, AP Central, APCD, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Vertical Teams, Pre-AP, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. Admitted Class Evaluation Service, CollegeEd, connect to college success, MyRoad, SAT Professional Development, SAT Readiness Program, and Setting the Cornerstones are trademarks owned by the College Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Board and National Merit Scholarship Corporation. All other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.com. How did Europeans perceive the role of organized sports in Europe during the period from 1860 to 1940? BASIC CORE: 1 point each to a total of 6 points 1. Provides an appropriate, explicitly stated, thesis that directly addresses all parts of the question. Thesis may not simply restate the question.    The thesis must suggest a minimal level of analysis or context (drawn from the documents). It need not appear in the first paragraph. 2. Discusses a majority of the documents individually and specifically. The student must use at least seven documents—even if used incorrectly—by reference to anything in the box. Documents cannot be referenced together in order to get credit for this point (e.g., “Documents 1, 4, and 6 suggest . . . ”). Documents need not be cited by number or by name.  3. Demonstrates understanding of the basic meaning of a majority of the documents (may misinterpret no more than one).   A student may not significantly misinterpret more than one document. A major misinterpretation is an incorrect analysis or one that leads to an inaccurate grouping or a false conclusion. 4. Supports the thesis with appropriate interpretations of a majority of the documents. The student must use at least seven documents, and the documents used in the body of the essay must provide support for the thesis. A student cannot earn this point if no credit was awarded for point 1 (appropriate thesis). 5. Analyzes point of view or bias in at least three documents. The student must make a reasonable effort to explain why a particular source expresses the stated view by • Relating authorial point of view to author’s place in society (motive, position, status, etc.), OR • Evaluating the reliability of the source, OR • Recognizing that different kinds of documents serve different purposes, OR • Analyzing the tone of the documents; must be well developed. Note: Attribution alone is not sufficient to earn credit for point of view. 6. Analyzes documents by explicitly organizing them in at least three appropriate groups. A group must contain at least two documents that are used correctly. Groupings and corresponding documents (not inclusive) may include the following:  Nationalism/national unity 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 9 Political 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11 Militarism/war   1, 5, 6 Spectator activity  3, 9 Health   3, 8, 9 10, 12 Social Darwinism/advancement 1, 3, 5, 7, 8 Moral strengthening/lessons 3, 4, 7, 8 Team building/camaraderie  4, 6, 7 Women/feminism   2, 10, 12 Rivalry   1, 3, 4, 5, 11 Prowar propaganda 5, 6 Cultural revolution  1, 8 EXPANDED CORE: 0–3 points to a total of 9 points Expands beyond the basic core of 1–6. The basic score of 6 must be achieved before a student can earn expanded core points. Examples: • Has a clear, analytical, and comprehensive thesis. • Uses all or almost all of the documents (11–12 documents).  • Uses the documents persuasively as evidence. • Shows understanding of nuances of the documents. • Analyzes point of view or bias in at least four documents cited in the essay. • Analyzes the documents in additional ways/additional groupings or other. • Brings in relevant “outside” information.  Document 1:  Miroslav Tyrs, commemorative speech as a cofounder, annual meeting, Czech National Gymnastics Organization, Prague, 1863 “We must create a new race . . . Combining a strong body with a strong will” that “will not depend on foreigners for its rights . . . this new race will create an unbreachable defense.” Document 2:  Extracts from the Czech National Gymnastics Organization official publication, The Czech Falcon, 1865–1912 Huge growth in number of clubs and membership between 1865 and 1910; women were counted for the first time in 1910. Document 3:  Sir Robert Baden-Powell, founder of the Boy Scouts, Scouting for Boys, London, 1908 Playing football is good for physical and moral development, unselfishness, and teamwork as training for any “game of life.” As a spectator sport, however, it is a “vicious game” that promotes poor health, betting, and hysteria. Document 4:  African delegate of a British colony to African Political Association, speech, “A Sound Mind in a Sound Body,” Cape Town, South Africa, 1910 “Great moral lessons can be learned on the cricket and rugby fields.” Rugby requires teamwork and “subordination of self” while cricket relies on “individual excellence.” Our young men are poor rugby players, a fact that also reflects our lack of union in the “battle of life.” Document 5:  Martin Berner, Berlin journalist, “The Olympic Idea in the World,” Soccer, Track, and Field Journal, Berlin, 1913 The Olympic Games are a way of glorifying the fatherland; they are not openly militaristic, but sports statistics provide insight into world ranking. The Games provide the Germans with a “symbol of world war.” Document 6:  British imperial government recruitment poster, First World War, 1914–1918 Poster uses a sports motif and an emphasis on teamwork to encourage young men to join “the game” of war. Document 7:  M. Fauré-Dujarric, “Practical Organization of a Sports Society,” Paris Encyclopedia of Sports, Paris, 1924 The activities of the young sportsman are good preparation for the “struggles of life.” Competition reminds us of the need for national solidarity and dependence on our fellow citizens and on the “great national team” to which we all belong. Document 8:  Nikolai Semashko, physician and first Soviet Health Minister, “Tenth Anniversary of Soviet Medicine in Physical Education,” Theory and Practice of Physical Education, Moscow, 1928 Sports are not about record breaking. The goal of physical education should be physical health, which is an integral part of the Soviet cultural revolution. Document 9:  Y. Mihashi, Japanese traveler, account of a high school gymnastics exhibition in Ollerup, Denmark, unpublished article, Tokyo, 1930 People were “completely carried away” by the gymnastics exhibition; “the muscular, sweating bodies . . . looked like statues come alive.” The gymnasts rallied around the Danish flag “like victorious warriors,” leading to much applause among the spectators. Document 10:  Alice Profe, German physician, “Recent Observations regarding the Physical Education of Women,” Railroad Exercise and Sports Newspaper, Berlin, 1930 There is no scientific basis to support the claim that women need different exercises from men to achieve improved strength. Document 11:  British National Workers Sports Association, “Peace Through Sport,” Fifth Annual Report, Cardiff, Wales, 1935 Good sportsmanship leads to “friendly rivalry” in a match between Continental and English players and serves to promote “the cause of Peace.” This will make it “harder for capitalists and Dictators to stir up nations to war against each other.” Document 12:  Ingeborg Schröder, Swedish gymnast, autobiography recalling the beginning of Swedish gymnastics in the 1880’s, published in 1940 Young girls today cannot imagine the restrictions that were placed on women’s activity and clothing when they first began to pursue gymnastics. Despite perceived impropriety, women enjoyed the strength, courage, and agility that came from physical pursuits. Compare and contrast the relationship between the artist and society in the Renaissance/Reformation period to the relationship between the artist and society in the late nineteenth century. 9–6: Stronger • Has a clear, well-developed thesis. • Is well organized. • Addresses the terms of the question. • Supports the thesis with specific evidence. • May contain minor errors; even a 9 need not be flawless. Indicators for 9–8 • May discuss both differences and similarities; explicit comparisons. • Discusses the Renaissance/Reformation and the nineteenth century more or less evenly; may include discussion of Reformation art. • Supports the thesis with specific and substantial evidence; well-developed examples.  • Demonstrates sophisticated analysis of the functions, patronage, and/or or status of artists in each period. Indicators for 7–6 • Discusses differences or similarities; comparison may be implicit rather than explicit. • Has appropriate and more or less even discussion of the Renaissance/Reformation and the  nineteenth century. • Supports the thesis with specific evidence; cites at least one artist, work of art, or artistic movement from each of the two periods. May discuss patronage or purchasers of art. • Discusses, even if briefly, the functions, patronage, and/or status of artists in each period. 5–4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic. • Demonstrates uneven response to the question’s terms. • May contain errors, factual or interpretive. Indicators • Addresses the question with generally accurate discussion but without specific mention of artists, artworks, or artistic movements. • Discusses differences in the art with only implicit discussion of the relationship of the artist to society. • Shows significant imbalance in the treatment of the Renaissance/Reformation and the nineteenth century. • May contain major errors but within a generally accurate and appropriate discussion. • Is descriptive rather than analytical. 3–0: Weaker • Thesis is confused, absent, or merely restates the question. • Misconstrues the question or omits major tasks. • May contain major errors. Indicators for 3–2 • Contains weak or muddled thesis, often suggesting false dichotomies. • Significant errors of chronology or discussion of art that are not mitigated by other accurate discussion; faulty analysis or comparisons; may discuss only one period. • Provides minimal discussion of differences or similarities in the Renaissance/Reformation and nineteenth century, or discussion of art, without even implicit reference to the relationship of the artist to society. • Offers limited evidence; may cite only one example or artist. Indicators for 1–0 • Thesis is erroneous, absent, or mere restatement of the question.  • Addresses only one period or cites examples of individuals who are not creative artists. • Offers minimal or no evidence. In terms of chronology, the two periods were defined as follows: the “Renaissance/Reformation” period beginning in the fifteenth century to the mid-seventeenth century [up to 1648, Peace of Westphalia]; the “late nineteenth century” beginning in the mid-nineteenth century up to the outbreak of World War I [1914].   One of the most important aspects of the Renaissance was its extraordinary efflorescence in the visual arts.  Artists broke sharply with the Gothic style dominating the late medieval period, not so much in terms of the content of art—for most art in the Renaissance was religious—but in style, incorporating classical themes and principles of proportion, and using the newly rediscovered mathematical perspective. Two genres make their appearance first in Renaissance art: the portrait and the landscape. In addition, the new printing technology allowed for the development of woodcuts, which were particularly popular in northern Europe. Artists broke too from their artisanal status as usually anonymous guildsmen in the medieval era, now signing their works and becoming well known in their countries and even abroad. They often were very wealthy and traveled in the best circles. Artists were closely associated with the leading Renaissance intellectual movement, humanism, and many of them participated in humanist work in their search for art from antiquity. Artists also reflected in their art the attitudes that humanists fostered in their writings:  individualism, secularism, and civic participation. Michelangelo’s David is a fine example of all three, although its civic role is less well known. In addition, Renaissance artists were often close to the patrons of humanistic studies who were also enthusiastic patrons of the visual arts, notably the Medici family in Florence. The Church in Rome as well as many individual churches and religious organizations, like confraternities, were major patrons of the arts as well. Guilds, merchants, and city-state governments were also important patrons. Most art produced in the Renaissance was commissioned. Leonardo da Vinci is a good example of the “universal man” so idealized in the Renaissance.  The artists of the Reformation period generally focused on religious themes. During the Reformation, satirical woodcuts were an effective means of disseminating Lutheran ideas. Rembrandt’s portraits of the staid Dutch burghers reflect Protestant sobriety as well as the successes of the Dutch Republic. His patrons were largely the merchant classes, although much of his work was not done on commission. The art of the Counter-Reformation is generally much better known. Bernini’s St. Teresa in Ecstasy is a good example of how the Counter-Reformation sought to win back or retain the Catholic faithful by highlighting the intense emotionality and mysticism encouraged in Catholicism and, generally speaking, anathema to Protestantism. The works of Rubens can be connected to both the Catholic resurgence and to the efforts to portray Catholic royalty and aristocracy in a positive light. Here, too, patronage of princes and the Church are crucial. The late nineteenth century, beginning after the 1848 revolutions, saw a turn against Romanticism and the development of many new artistic styles, among which three stand out: Realism in the 1850’s, Impressionism in the 1880’s, and Cubism at the turn of the century. Artists were affected by the development of photography at the beginning of this period, and by cinema at the end; for many, they were no longer bound by the traditional function of art to portray people and places. The relationship of the artist became more varied, as some artists continued to paint portraits, while others were rebellious or had political agendas. Some artists, particularly the realists, sought to encourage reform by showing the conditions of the poor in both cities and the countryside. This is also true for the literary artists, many of whom saw as their subjects the downtrodden of society or sought to reveal the flaws of middle-class life. Much of the new visual art was vilified and attacked by both critics and the public, and while some artists lived well, others died poor and obscure; Van Gogh being the prime example of the latter. Patronage changed as art became public. Government-sponsored salons and museums attracted thousands of viewers, while many of the nontraditional artists founded their own art galleries or sold their art privately. Much of the patronage came from newly enriched middle classes. Artists reflected the troubling feelings many had about the development of modern industrial cities and the social dislocations that accompanied that development. While Romanticism in the visual arts generally flourished before 1848, Romanticism in music blossomed in the second half of the century, with many composers playing an important role in the fostering of nationalism. Music halls, both vaudeville and classical, provided the urban masses with new opportunities to hear music. Below are suggestions of points students might make, listed in random order. THIS IS NOT A CHECKLIST. Students might be expected to make one or two of these points for each period in a competent essay. Renaissance/Reformation Period: • Transformation of artisan to artist—the artist as professional, the artist as genius. • Patronage of wealthy merchant families like the Medici [Donatello]. • Patronage of the papacy [Michelangelo and the Sistine Chapel, Raphael]. • Patronage of kings [Francois I and da Vinci, Maximilian I and Durer, Titian painting Charles V four times]. • Patronage of princes or rulers of small states [Titian and Isabella d’Este, Gonzoli and the Medici]. • Patronage of city-state governments [Michelangelo’s David]. • Patronage of guilds [Ghilberti’s Bronze Doors, Orsanmichele]. • Artists reflect new attitudes in society toward the individual, secularism, etc. • Portraiture reflects the Renaissance stress on individualism; wealth and egoism of patrons. • Use of linear perspective reflects the practical merchant mentalities of the Italian city-states and new approaches in science. • Baroque art glorified Catholic religious figures [Bernini’s Ecstasy of St. Teresa of Avila]. • Dutch art reflects sobriety of Calvinism [early Rembrandt]. • Renaissance/Reformation art remains largely religious because of lots of church patronage. • Limited options for artists in terms of content and style of art; most works commissioned. • Renaissance artists began to be able to negotiate their right to create as they saw fit, evident in contracts of later period. • Reformation spread partially through use of caricatures (satirical drawings) of Catholic figures. • Renaissance artists often became wealthy, important, and highly regarded people in society.  Generally, they were NOT poor. • Art market develops in Low Countries; substantial competition between artists. • Northern European artists interested in painting lives of peasants [Bruegel], showing them to be jovial and communal. • Renaissance artists reflected societal value of excellence in several fields [Da Vinci as universal man; Alberti as scholar and architect; Michelangelo as sculptor, painter, architect, poet, etc.]. • Both Lutherans and Catholics in the Counter-Reformation used music to spread their faith. • Women often portrayed as “trophy wives” or portrayed in their maternal roles. AP® EUROPEAN HISTORY 2006 SCORING GUIDELINES Question 2 Historical Background (continued) Late Nineteenth Century: • New artistic genres/technologies challenge traditional roles of artists—e.g., photography in the mid century, cinema at end; artists respond by doing art that cannot be done by camera—e.g., impressionism, pointillism [Seurat]. • After 1848, artists began to reject Romantic portrayals of heroes and instead showed concerns for rural or urban poor, working class [Courbet]; concerned over political repression, economic change. Development of realism, painting of stark realities. • Artists portrayed Industrial Revolution—train stations and other industrial sites as well as impact of Industrial Revolution on workers; daily life. • Impressionists left studios and painted al fresco; interested in light in ordinary rural landscapes and urban scenes. • Some artists rejected Western society altogether [Gauguin going off to live in Tahiti]. • Artists often struggled, were poor or emotionally bereft; artists become defined as tortured  geniuses [Van Gogh]. • Art salon shows, sponsored and juried by government officials, were attended by hundreds of thousands of people; artists no longer dependent on patronage of wealthy. • Artists rejected salons [government-sponsored art shows] and opened up their own gallery spaces to show their art. • Art becomes increasingly commercialized. • Realism parallels development of social sciences [sociology, positivism, anthropology]. • Artists play important role in developing nationalism, providing common images on which to build identity. • Musical arts play increasing important roles in leisure in mass society—opera, concert halls, vaudeville. • Artists and photographers reflect treatment of natives in the colonies and the brutalities of war, or, alternatively, prettied them up. • Caricature becomes important political tool in electoral competitions. • Artists interested in newly renovated/redesigned cities, e.g., Paris under Napoleon III. • Arts and Crafts Style rejects industrial in favor of artisanal production [Morris]. • Influence on artists and art of non-Western cultures as a result of imperialism. • Much of the subject matter of late-nineteenth-century art is the leisure time activities of middle and upper class; reflecting the economic impact of the Industrial Revolution [dance halls, race tracks, picnics in parks, cafes]. • Women doing ordinary activities are frequent subjects of late-nineteenth-century art, reflecting growing presence of women in the public sphere. • Artists interested in portraying mixes of social classes in the modern city, reflecting continuing urbanization in this period. • Indoor lighting in paintings reflects growing use of light bulbs. • Late-nineteenth-century Romantic composers—Tchaikovsky, Brahms, Berlioz, Wagner, et al.— played important roles in creating national consciousness or reflected national issues. • Opera in Italy becomes a force for national cultural identity creation [Puccini, Verdi]. • Writers [Dickens, Shaw, HG Wells, Zola] focused on social issues in their novels, reflecting impact of industrialization and social change. • Women have the opportunity to become artists [Cassatt] or important novelists [Eliot] reflecting growing liberation of women from traditional roles. • Artists may develop ideological focus, for example, socialist artists interested in increasing awareness of the consequences of capitalistic industrialization. • The establishment of art museums changes both the prestige of artists and their relationship to the public. SIMILARITIES in the relationship of the artist and society in the two periods: • Artists and the arts in both periods are important in society. • Individual portraiture is found in both periods. • Ordinary women are often subjects of art. • Artists reflect values of middle classes. • Artists are mostly men. • Artists are interested in portraying ordinary life, particularly peasants. • Artists reflect contemporary scientific knowledge and attitudes.     DIFFERENCES in the relationship of the artist and society in the two periods: • Renaissance/Reformation artists are usually under patronage of church or prince; nineteenth-century artists paint and then try to sell works. • Renaissance artists are still just coming out of guild system, not yet fully independent; nineteenth-century artists are independent. Apprenticeships are typically replaced by Academy training. • Renaissance/Reformation artists often painted/sculpted neo-Platonist ideals; nineteenth-century artists are focused on portraying ordinary, real life. • Renaissance/Reformation artists exalt values of their society; nineteenth-century artists challenge them or portray their underside. • Renaissance/Reformation paintings are rarely on public view, nineteenth-century paintings are typically shown to public. • Renaissance/Reformation artists are often quite wealthy, important figures in society; some nineteenth-century artists are marginalized or poor. • Image of genius changes from universal [Da Vinci] to tortured [Van Gogh]. Analyze the aims, methods, and degree of success of the Catholic Reformation (Counter-Reformation) in the sixteenth century. 9–6: Stronger • Has a clear, well-developed thesis. • Is well organized. • Addresses the terms of the question. • Supports the thesis with specific evidence. • May contain minor errors; even a 9 need not be flawless. Indicators for 9–8 • Fully engages with the terms of the question, explicitly linking aims, methods, and degree of success of the Catholic Reformation (Counter-Reformation). • Analysis recognizes complexity of issues and events (e.g., doctrinal, political, military). • Discussion is drawn from the sixteenth century and the context of the Catholic Reformation (Counter-Reformation). Indicators for 7–6 • Fully engages with the terms of the question. • Links aims, methods, and degree of success with minimal conflation of terms. • Analyzes issues and events (e.g., doctrinal, political, military). • Discussion is drawn from the sixteenth century and the context of the Catholic Reformation (Counter-Reformation). 5–4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic. • Uneven response to the question’s terms. • May contain errors, factual or interpretive. Indicators for 5–4 • Addresses all parts of the question, perhaps in general terms.  • May conflate aims and methods or fail to distinguish adequately between the two.  • Discussion may be more descriptive than analytical. • May contain factual errors (chronology, events, etc.) that affect interpretation. 3–0: Weaker • Thesis is confused, absent, or merely restates the question. • Misconstrues the question or omits major tasks. • May contain major errors. Indicators for 3–2 • Responds to the question with a description of the causes of the Protestant Reformation or the status of the Catholic Church.  • Essay describes events with only superficial analysis. • May not address all parts of the question. • May contain serious errors of fact or interpretation. Indicators for 1–0 • May attempt to address the question but fails to do so. • May not contain specific evidence. • May contain significant errors of fact or interpretation. The terms Catholic Reformation and Counter-Reformation are used interchangeably by most students in responding to this essay. Counter-Reformation refers to the Catholic Church’s response to the Protestant movement of the sixteenth century. Some are also familiar with the Catholic Reformation in the context of the conciliar movement beginning in the early fifteenth century; however, this distinction is not necessary for this question, and students may use either term in their responses. The question topic is well covered in commonly used textbooks, and, when paired with the Protestant Reformation, often comprises a major unit in the AP European History course in terms of amount of time spent and depth of content. The question asks students to analyze three related elements: the aims, methods, and degree of success of the Catholic Reformation (Counter-Reformation) in the sixteenth century. This creates a useful organizing schema and suggests topics for the primary task, analysis.  Student responses generally engage with the question’s required elements and include a variety of evidence drawn from Catholic belief and practice, political rivalry, and international relations. The most frequently cited evidence was various accounts of the Catholic response to Luther, the Council of Trent, and the founding of new orders, especially the Jesuits.    Evidence used by students follows, divided into the categories provided by the question: aims, methods, and degree of success. Items are placed in the categories where they are most often used by students. Depending on the context established in the essay, much of this material can properly appear as either aims or methods.   AIMS: Note: Aims may be expressed as those of the papacy, the Curia, conciliar movement, monarchs, and/or the faithful. • Define and clarify Church doctrine and practices. • Respond to or contain the Protestant challenge. • Eliminate Protestantism. • Reform Church practices including: indulgences, simony, absentee Church office holders, monastic corruption, pluralism, incompetent or immoral clergy. • Exert political authority over monarchs, princes. • Monarchs used religion as an expression of their rule. o Charles V (Holy Roman Emperor, aka Charles I of Spain) “world monarchy . . . towards the gathering of all Christendom under a single shepherd.” o Philip II (Spain)—saw his reign as justified by religion—Catholic above all else. o Ferdinand and Isabella (Spain) —Spanish Inquisition, religious conformity, Moriscos and Marranos. o Francis I (France) title included “the Most Christian king.”  o Henry IV (Henry of Navarre) French Wars of Religion, “Paris is worth a mass,” Edict of Nantes, politique, changed his religion in order to rule. o Henry VIII, broke with the papacy, established monarchical authority over papal authority. o Mary Tudor, restored Catholicism in England, returned Church from monarchical authority to papal authority. o Elizabeth returned Church from papal authority to monarchical authority; thwarted Philip II at every turn, defeated the Armada Católica. • Popes of the sixteenth century sought to reaffirm papal authority over Catholicism, Curia, conciliar movement, monarchs, international Catholicism. • Cardinals sought to affirm power of the conciliar movement as superior to that of the pope. • Curia sought to reaffirm power of the institutional structure of the Church. • Deepening of religious and spiritual experience among faithful Catholics. • Missionary and humanitarian work in Europe, Africa, Asia, Americas. • Movement to modernize the Church by returning to early, simpler Church practices. METHODS: Methods for accomplishing aims may be categorized as Catholic reforms or changes in religious practice, anti-Protestant responses, assertions of Church or papal power, or political actions. • Council of Trent (1545, periodically until 1563): review, reform, enunciation of Church doctrine and practice o Review and enunciation of doctrine:  • Justification by faith and good works • Equal weight to tradition and scripture • Transubstantiation • Seven sacraments • Special status of the priest • Priest participation in confession and absolution • Purgatory o Reform of some practices:  • Indulgences curtailed • Rules for holding Church offices • Education of priests (e.g., seminaries, printing press may be cited, improved preaching) o Reassertion of most practices: • Vulgate (St. Jerome) Bible • Latin as the language of worship • Key role of priests in worship and the religious experience • Veneration of saints; adoration of Mary • Use of images, relics, pilgrimages • Celibacy of clergy and monasticism upheld • Political o Church: strengthened and reaffirmed central authority of the Church; high papalism o Diplomatic: involvement in national and international politics o Government: (Where Catholics retained control of governments, Protestants tended to dwindle into small minorities. Where Protestants won control of government, people became Protestant.) o Direct and indirect involvement in international politics o Military action • Spain, Catholic crusade in Europe; Armada (Armada Católica) • French Wars of Religion • Schmalkaldic War • Virtually no concessions to Protestantism, especially after 1541 • Missionary work, conversion and reconversion, in Europe, Africa, Asia, Americas • Mysticism—St. Theresa of Avila, et al. • New Catholic Orders: Jesuits, Ursulines, Oratorians • Inquisitions o Spanish o Roman • Reforming popes: Paul III, Leo X, Paul IV • Censorship of books (Index of Forbidden Books) • Art—the Baroque DEGREE OF SUCCESS: Successes: Cup half empty or half full? • Church survived. • Maintained all beliefs. • Many who left returned to Catholicism. • Deepened and reinvigorated religious experience. • Pope’s role reasserted. • Central authority of the Church as an institution reasserted. • Education of priests and others given added importance. • Where Catholics retained control of governments, Protestants became in time small minorities. • Missionaries, Francis Xavier. Failures: • Religious divisions became a permanent reality in European culture.  • May have led to a gradual secularization of modern societies. • Peace of Augsburg, 1555, gave German princes right to choose religion. • Charles V gave up after 35 years, abdicated, and retired to a monastery. • Philip II: o Stupendous failure of his Catholic crusades . o English, Dutch, and the French Huguenots’ causes undeterred . o Spain bankrupted, virtually destroyed. • Religious divisions destroyed the expectation of peacefulness within homes and communities.  • May have strengthened nationalism. • Where Protestants won control of government, people became Protestant. Question 3 Historical Background (continued) Commonly Cited Evidence:  Paul III  1534-49  Julius III  1550-55  Paul IV  1555-59  Pius IV   1559-65  Pius V  1566-72  Gregory XIII  1572-85  Sixtus V   1585-90  Peace of Augsburg      1555   Luther, 95 Theses  1517  Diet of Worms  1521  Augsburg Confession  1530  Council of Trent       1545-47; 1551-52, 1562-63 Charles V 1519-56 Philip II 1556-98 Henry VIII 1509-47 Mary Tudor 1553-58 Elizabeth I   1558–1603   Sack of Rome 1529 Lepanto 1571 Spanish Armada 1588 Catholic League 1580’s Union of Arras  1579 Council of Troubles ( . . . Blood) Francis I 1515-47 Henry II     1547-59 Charles IX     1560–1674 French Wars of Religion   1562-98 St. Bart’s Day Massacre 1572 Henry IV (Henry of Navarre)       1589–1610 Edict of Nantes 1598 Ignatius Loyola Spiritual Exercises 1491–1556 Jesuits 1540 Teresa of Avila 1515-82 Ursulines Capuchins—Franciscans, simplicity, poverty, direct preaching  Benedictines, Dominicans—reformed/renewed Theatines, 1524, reformers, orphanages and hospitals Oratory of Divine Love, Italy, clergy and laymen (1497) Francis Xavier, 1506-52—began as Jesuit—to East Analyze the effects of the Columbian exchange (the interchange of plants, animals, and diseases between the Old World and the New World) on the population and economy of Europe in the period 1550 to 1700. 9–6: Stronger • Has a clear, well-developed thesis. • Is well organized. • Addresses the terms of the question. • Supports the thesis with specific evidence. • May contain minor errors; even a 9 need not be flawless. Indicators for 9–8 • Thesis demonstrates understanding of the Columbian exchange. • Discusses examples from at least two prompts; minimal references to other examples, such as minerals and humans. • Analyzes effects of Columbian exchange on both the population and economy of Europe. Indicators for 7–6 • Discusses at least one example from prompts but also should consider other plants/animals or their by-products; may also discuss the impact of humans and minerals. • Focuses on the period in question, 1550–1700, but may include some material from earlier and later periods. • Examines effects of Columbian exchange on the population and economy of Europe. 5–4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic. • Demonstrates uneven response to the question’s terms. • May contain errors, factual or interpretive. Indicators • Discussion of the Columbian exchange and its effects may be conflated. • Uneven treatment of examples of Columbian exchange; may lack specificity. • Discussion may be more descriptive or narrative than analytical. • May contain errors (chronology, features, or effects) that affect interpretation. 3–0: Weaker • Thesis is confused, absent, or merely restates the question. • Misconstrues the question or omits major tasks. • May contain major errors. Indicators for 3–2 • Thesis is confused, absent, or merely restates the question. • Weak consideration of the Columbian exchange or no significant discussion of its impact. • Reflects paucity of examples from either component of the Columbian exchange, or ignores them. • May not address all parts of the question. • Contains significant or numerous errors of fact or interpretation. Question 4 (continued) Indicators for 1–0 • Essays scored 0 or 1 may attempt to address the question but fail to do so. • May not contain specific evidence. • May contain a number of serious errors. There was a “Columbian Exchange,” and there was a Columbian exchange. In 1972 Alfred Crosby characterized the meeting of Europe and the Americas during the fifteenth to seventeenth centuries as an exchange that affected both regions. His “Columbian Exchange” was a transfer (interchange) of organisms.  From Europe migrated not only conquerors with superior military technology but also such animals as horses, cattle, goats, and sheep; grain plants and sugar cane; and fateful diseases like smallpox, dysentery, and diphtheria. For its part the New World provided a host of sustaining crops that could be cultivated in Europe, such as potatoes, maize (corn), tomatoes, squashes, and varieties of beans; foods that appealed to European tastes, such as cacao (chocolate), avocados, and chilies; and other products that served a growing demand, such as tobacco, indigo, and cotton. Few New World animals of consequence migrated to Europe during this period, but possibly the venereal disease syphilis first reached Europe from the Americas. Before and since the publication of Crosby’s work, students of European expansion have not neglected his factors but have also pointed to the interregional migration of people and their cultures and metals (iron from Europe and silver and gold from the Americas). The student must discuss the impact of the Columbian exchange on the population and economies of Europe. For example, this might include the effects of transferred food crops on diet and population growth in Europe, potatoes and corn as factors in the agricultural revolution, the economic effect of cane sugar and tobacco production on European economies (e.g., wealth produced by the New World plantation systems for Europe, the stimulation that agriculture gave to international commerce and later industrialization, the need for large-scale labor for sugar and tobacco plantations and thereby the triangular trading system and trans-Atlantic slavery), the establishment of a “mercantilist” system of trade, the export of grain, meat, leather and animal hides to Europe, or the spread of syphilis among many Europeans. The exchange can easily be linked to the establishment of colonial societies and the exploitation of the Americas. Mention of the impact on Europe of European emigration to the Americas is not a rare response. Some crops transferred (transplanted) from the New World (Americas) to the Old World (Europe): Potatoes (from the Andes regions; popular in sixteenth-century Europe initially among lower classes) Maize (Indian corn) Tomatoes (cultivated in Europe by mid-sixteenth century) Squashes (includes pumpkins and gourds) Beans (haricots and others)  Chiles Agricultural products: Avocados Cacao (chocolate from Mexico) Peanuts Cotton (raw and finished textiles)—cotton was native to both Old and New World, but New World cotton varieties eventually became more important (well after 1700). Tobacco Indigo (dye) Vanilla Some crops transferred (transplanted) from the Old World to the New World: Coffee (from Africa/Arabia; cultivated in the Americas but only after 1700) Cane sugar (originally from Asia, later cultivated in Mediterranean; major plantation crop in Brazil in sixteenth century, then also in Caribbean; refined mostly in Europe, made into rum and molasses) Wheat (to temperate zones of the Americas) Some animal species transferred (transplanted) from the Old World to the New World: Cows Horses Pigs Sheep Goats Chickens Organic commodities available from the New World following European colonization: Furs and hides (beaver and others) Leather (cow); sheep skins Tallow (from cows, for candles) Meat (beef mostly) Fish (banks off Nova Scotia) Cinchona bark (source of quinine) Timber Metals and minerals taken from New World: Silver Gold Precious stones  Diseases from the Old World: Smallpox Measles Diptheria Diseases from New World: Syphilis—may have come from the New World Compare and contrast the social and economic roles of the state in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Europe (before 1789) to the social and economic roles of the state in Europe after the Second World War. 9–6: Stronger • Has a clear, well-developed thesis. • Is well organized. • Addresses the terms of the question. • Supports the thesis with specific evidence. • May contain minor errors; even a 9 need not be flawless. Indicators for 9–8 • Essay covers both time periods and both roles.  • Stronger essays may concentrate on capitalism, socialism, or communism in later time period. • A strong essay that focuses on theoretical issues or generalizes without giving abundant factual evidence may be placed in this category. • Thesis may emerge from the contents or appear at the end. Indicators for 7–6 • Essay covers both time periods and both roles. • An essay that covers both halves of the question but slights either economic or social issues in one time period may be placed in this range. • Thesis may emerge from the contents or appear at the end. 5–4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic. • Uneven response to the question’s terms. • May contain errors, factual or interpretive. Indicators • Attempts to answer both halves of the question. • May focus almost entirely on one time period with only vague information about the other. • May discuss either economic or social issues in both time periods. 3–0: Weaker • Thesis is confused, absent, or merely restates the question. • Misconstrues the question or omits major tasks. • May contain major errors. Indicators for 3–2 • May answer only one half of the question. • May contain only information outside of time periods—French Revolution, Fascism. Question 5 (continued) Indicators for 1–0 • Essays scored 0 or 1 may attempt to address the question but fail to do so. • May include only one or two solid points of evidence. • May contain a number of serious errors. • Even a zero may contain pertinent information. Most of the major texts scatter information about the seventeenth to eighteenth centuries through several chapters. Social and economic information is interspersed with politics, as can be expected. Information on the post–World War II era is usually in at least two chapters with the fall of the Soviet Union being the general demarcation between chapters.  The focus of the question for the first time period is public order, social hierarchy, and mercantilism resulting in warfare and protectionist economies; for the second time period it is individualism, the welfare state, the growth of the super state (European Union), and/or the dismantling of the Communist system. A summary of the information found in the most complete texts is included below. 1. Kagan, Ozment, Turner The Western Heritage Chapter 13 discusses the rise of England and France into parliamentary monarchy and absolutism, respectively. Social, religious, and economic issues are covered. Mercantilism is explained. Chapter 15 mentions the development of the Dutch Republic as an urban, tolerant, and prosperous commercial society whose power declined in the early eighteenth century, but whose role in international financial affairs preserved its standing to some extent. The development of the corrupt English electoral system is mentioned, as are both financial bubbles in England and France. The Ottoman Empire, Poland, and Prussia are touched on. Chapter 16 discusses the major features of old regime life in both England and France, comparing nobility, peasantry, and the family economy before industrialism. Chapter 17 is a detailed discussion of the effects of mercantilism and the plantation system. For the post–World War II era, chapter 30 has a political focus, although things like the suppression of churches in the Soviet Union, collectivization, and domination of education are mentioned but not in detail. Khrushchev’s retreat from Stalinism toward consumer goods and decentralized economic planning is briefly covered. Eastern European protests are mentioned but again mostly politically. Chapter 31 focuses on Western Europe, covering population trends, the development of the welfare state, feminism, and the development of a consumer society. 2. Kishlansky, Geary, O’Brien Civilization in the West Information in this text is condensed. Chapter 16 discusses the origins of absolutism vs. the English Revolutions of the seventeenth century. The religious right to resist is mentioned, as is the theory of society as a covenant espoused by Milton (and later philosophes). Absolutism is regarded as the “zenith” of the royal state, and Peter the Great as an Eastern absolutist is mentioned. Chapter 17 discusses science and the rise of the mercantile philosophy. The development of worldwide commerce is discussed: new banking methods, new products, mercantilism, and tulipmania in the Netherlands are covered. Chapter 18 discusses the evolution of the eighteenth-century British state and the creation of its international trading empire set against the wars of the century, which are seen as largely commercial. Chapter 19 shows the effects of this change: enlightenment thinking; the rise of intellectual cultural pursuits like opera, salons; and the increasing wealth, which created a top-heavy society. The bourgeoisie is mentioned, as is European urbanization. Companionate marriage and the change of family life are portrayed. New products, including those that harmed (gin), are mentioned. Chapter 29 covers the post–World War II period. The focus of the chapter is economic recovery and the development of the welfare state; there is the relevant political information, but this text does not spend as much time on politics as it does on things like the rise of youth culture, the sexual revolution, women at  Question 5 Historical Background (continued) work, and consumer economics. Chapter 30 covers the end of the Cold War, discussing in some detail the Soviet economy and the grassroots protests in Eastern Europe. 3. Palmer, Colton, Kramer A History of the Modern World This text is focused on political developments with some recent additions of social issues. It first looks at France in chapter 4, then the Netherlands. Religious toleration in the Netherlands is mentioned as is the banking system. The discussions of both the Stuart monarchies and the development of absolutism are almost wholly political in nature. Versailles and Colbert’s economic and social policies are discussed. Chapter 5 contrasts with Eastern European developments. Chapter 7 talks about the elite and popular cultures, the developing eighteenth-century global economy, and the resulting economic rivalry, which culminated in the Peace of Paris of 1763. Health issues, etiquette, and some entertainment issues are discussed, as is Carnival. An excellent selection of art complements the discussion. For the post–World War II period, there is some emphasis on the economic and political reconstruction of Western Europe and the growth of the welfare state. Britain’s Labour government and its issues as well as the French Republics are covered. The development of a global economy in the 1960s and ‘70s ends the parameters of this question, and finding information about Russia’s breakdown or other pertinent issues becomes difficult because of the global focus of the end of the book. 4. Spielvogel Western Civilization Chapter 14 covers the discovery of the New World through the development of the mercantile system and empire building. Chapter 15 talks about state building and gives a bit of brief information about social trends, witchcraft, and population increases, etc. French absolutism is covered in detail, and all states are at least touched on in some fashion, including Sweden. The development in England of limited monarchy is briefer, but there is some information about European culture, concentrating on art and theater. Chapter 18 covers the European states in the eighteenth century and talks of economic expansion and social change. The last two chapters in the book talk about the post–World War II era—the Cold War and the end of colonialism take center stage. All the major states are covered briefly, with criticism of their systems, the creation of the welfare state, the new culture of youth protest, and women’s liberation. Here, too, the focus is political, but there is some discussion of popular culture. 5. Chambers, Hanawalt, Rabb, et al.  The Western Experience Chapter 16 introduces Baroque art, social changes, urbanization. Chapter 17 covers the European state system with a detailed explanation of French absolutism, Eastern absolutists, and the English system. On England, text emphasizes growth, stability. Chapter 18 analyzes “The Wealth of Nations” and includes industry, agriculture, and empire building. As a contrast, eastern European serfdom is detailed.  Mercantilism and the beginning of the British Empire end the chapter. Chapter 19 on the Enlightenment has information about religious toleration developing and the new culture of travel, reading, art, magazines, schools, and recreation. Postwar issues are covered in a chapter devoted to the war itself and focus on the East–West split. There is some information on the development of the British welfare state, the Soviet Union under Stalin, and France, but not much. The final chapter in the text focuses on the last 40 years of the century, again very briefly. In the period 1815–1900, political liberalization progressed much further in western Europe than in Russia.  Analyze the social and economic reasons for this difference. 9–6: Stronger • Has a clear, well-developed thesis. • Is well organized. • Addresses the terms of the question. • Supports the thesis with specific evidence. • May contain minor errors; even a 9 need not be flawless. Indicators for 9–8–7–6 • Has a relevant thesis. • Analyzes social and economic reasons; evidence prior to 1815 may be used. • Links political liberalization to social and economic factors. • Provides evidence for Russia and the West; 6’s and 7's may primarily focus on one or the other. 5–4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic. • Demonstrates uneven response to the question’s terms. • May contain errors, factual or interpretive. Indicators • Has a thesis. • Contains superficial discussion of social and/or economic factors. • Hints at connection between political liberalization and socialand/or economic factors. • Identifies characteristics of Russia and/or the West. 3–0: Weaker • Thesis is confused, absent, or merely restates the question. • Misconstrues the question or omits major tasks. • May contain major errors. Indicators for 3–2 • Has an ineffective thesis or has thesis that remains totally unsupported. • Makes no connection between social and economic factors and political liberalization. Indicators for 1–0 • Essays scored 0 or 1 may attempt to address the question but fail to do so. • Minimal or no reference to social or economic factors. • Irrelevant or unfocused response. Question 6 Historical Background In the post-Napoleonic period, Europe went through decades of conflict between the forces of conservatism, or reaction, and those who sought political, economic, and social change. This question asks students to identify social and economic differences between Russia and the West that account for the differing degrees of political liberalization that had been achieved by each. Economic reasons for the West’s greater political liberalization: • Earlier Agricultural Revolution decreased the number of people needed in agrarian production. • Industrialization and urbanization: populations shifted from countryside to cities with greater concentrations of people. • Economic power shifted from the landed aristocracy to the new capitalists (or middle classes).  This new group demanded political power reflective of its economic power. • Increased prosperity enhanced educational possibilities. • Less restrictive trade practices increased the wealth of western European nations and their industrialists. Social reasons for the West’s greater political liberalization: • Creation of capitalist class (or middle class) and an urban working class, disgruntled and easily organized. • Increased literacy and rapid spread of liberal ideas among groups; daily newspapers proliferated in Western cities in the second half of the nineteenth century. • Creation of unions and labor parties with greater demands for liberal programs. • Greater social fluidity or mobility as opportunity increased. Historical developments that might be included in discussion of the West’s advantages: • July revolution of 1830 in France: liberals, supported by bankers, industrialists, and the urban middle class replaced the reactionary Charles X with the “Bourgeois King,” Louis Philippe; revolutionary workers were instrumental in the revolt. This influenced revolutions in Belgium (successful) and Poland (unsuccessful). • Reform Bills in England (1832, 1867, 1884) all of which expanded the franchise and contributed to political liberalization; students may emphasize the role of Parliament. • Poor Laws of 1834, and the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846, represented the supremacy of the English bourgeoisie, an expression of political liberalization. • The Chartist movement and demands for working-class participation in the political process, many of which were eventually incorporated into the English system. • Revolutions of 1848: sparked by the February Revolution in France, virtually every capital in continental Europe (Moscow excepted) was rocked by liberal, nationalist, or radical revolutions, the aims of which typically included demands for political liberalization. • Prussian Constitution of 1850 expanded representation to powerful industrialists. • 1860’s French unions become legal and win the right to organize and strike. • Bismarck’s compromises with socialists and other workers, including expansion of suffrage and other political rights, in the 1860’s and 1870’s. • The evolution of the Conservative and Liberal Parties in England during the 1870’s and 1880’s under Disraeli and Gladstone; expanded the franchise by turns, and passed laws granting and protecting enhanced workers’ rights. • The formation of the third French Republic in the 1870’s, including universal manhood suffrage. • Social legislation in Bismarck’s Germany during the 1880’s provided various forms of insurance for the working classes. • Creation of the British Labour Party in 1900. Economic reasons for Russia’s limited political liberalization: • Lack of industrialization; genuine industrialization was delayed until the very late portion of the period in question. • The economy was more feudal than capitalistic. • As Russia began to industrialize late in the nineteenth century, much of the capital was provided either by the state or foreigners (French, British, and German). • Russia was an exporter of grain but lacked the resources to purchase capital goods from the West; thus there was limited commercial interaction between the regions. • Poverty and famine were prevalent at various times during the nineteenth century. Social reasons for Russia’s limited political liberalization: • With very limited industrialization, no real middle class developed that would agitate for greater voice in policy. • There was no large urban working class that might organize and rally to demand rights and protections. • Oppressive serfdom continued to exist during the first portion of the period in question; their “liberation” brought little real change in their condition as they remained a poor peasant class with limited opportunity. • The great mass of Russian people remained illiterate; educational opportunities of the West were mostly unavailable. • The Russian Intelligentsia was a small class with little identity beyond an interest in ideas; they subscribed to a wide range of ideologies from liberalism to socialism, anarchism, and nihilism. Historical developments that might be included in discussion of Russia’s limitations in political liberalization: • Russia’s role in Congress Europe (1820’s) as Alexander I shifted from liberal to reactionary under Metternich’s tutelage. • The Decembrist revolt of 1825 and the ultrareactionary Nicholas I. • Impact of the Crimean War (1850’s), demonstrated Russian weaknesses in confronting Western powers. • The Emancipation of the serfs in 1861 by Alexander II; while no longer “owned” they remained a desperately poor peasantry with little real freedom of movement or opportunity. • Alexander’s other reforms of the 1860’s (zemstvos, courts) and their limited impact on liberalization. • The assassination of Alexander II in 1881; he was succeeded by the more reactionary and autocratic Alexander III who applied brutal repression to calls for political liberalization. Considering the period 1933 to 1945, analyze the economic, diplomatic, and military reasons for Germany’s defeat in the Second World War. 9–6: Stronger • Has a clear, well-developed thesis. • Is well organized. • Addresses the terms of the question. • Supports the thesis with specific evidence. • May contain minor errors; even a 9 need not be flawless. Indicators for 9–8 • Provides appropriate analysis and detail for all three sets of factors. • Specifically addresses entire period from 1933 to 1945. Indicators for 7–6 • Chronological introduction may stand in place of thesis. • May discuss interwar period in general, prior to more detailed discussion of war years. 5–4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic. • Uneven response to the question’s terms. • May contain errors, factual or interpretive. Indicators for 5–4 • Contains a thesis, possibly simplistic or a restatement, sustained by organization. • Chronological introduction may stand in place of thesis. • Responds to question unevenly but with specific examples; may omit one set of factors. 3–0: Weaker • Thesis is confused, absent, or merely restates the question. • Misconstrues the question or omits major tasks. • May contain major errors. Indicators for 3–2 • Responds to question incompletely with limited specifics. • May contain multiple errors. Indicators for 1–0 • Essays scored 0 or 1 may attempt to address the question but fail to do so. • May not contain specific evidence. • May contain a number of serious errors. Economic Factors: • May 1933: German Labor Front replaces trade unions. • 1935 Nuremberg Laws and later loss of Jewish expertise and talent weaken German economy. • 1936 “Four-Year Plan” largely failed: steel, iron, fuel, rubber all heavily dependent on imports. • Food shortages continue until 1936, although rearmament did lead to economic recovery. • German exploitation of economic resources of conquered states effective in short-run. • Diversion of resources to pursuit of genocide proves costly. • Allied bombing highly destructive, although German industrial capacity continues to expand. • Soviet industrialization (5-Year Plans) underestimated. • U.S. economic might underestimated: Lend–Lease program; “Arsenal of democracy.” • Hitler’s refusal to commit to full war economy prior to 1943 is detrimental. Diplomatic Factors: • Hitler repudiates Versailles Treaty and League of Nations. • March 7, 1936: Hitler remilitarizes Rhineland. • October 1936: Germany allies with Italy, followed by Anti-Comintern Pact with Japan. • September 1939: Having agreed to the absorption of the Czech Sudetenland the previous year, Chamberlain signed Munich agreement promising “peace in our time.” • April 6, 1939: Following invasion of Czechoslovakia, Britain signed defense pact with Poland. • May 1939: Germany and Italy enter military alliance, Pact of Steel. • August 23, 1939: Germany and Soviet Union sign Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact. • France and Britain declare war on Germany. • German invasion of Soviet Union in June 1941 invalidates Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact. • December 11, 1941: Germany declares war on United States, following Pearl Harbor. • Hitler unable to shake solidarity of Big Three (U.S., U.S.S.R., G.B.)  Military Factors: • Hitler announces military expansion in 1935. • March 12, 1938: Anschluss brings Austria under German control. • March 16, 1939: Germany invaded Czechoslovakia, occupying Prague. • September 1, 1939: Germany invades Poland with 1.5 million troops—Blitzkrieg. • Spring 1940 saw defeat of Norway and Denmark, Netherlands, and Belgium. • June 14, 1940: Paris occupied, with Pétain signing armistice on June 22. • Britain, however, evacuates troops from Dunkirk and also survives the blitz. • June 22, 1941: Germany invades Soviet Union with 3 million troops. • Two-front war, German overextension. • Stalingrad, February 1943 leaves 300,000 German soldiers dead. • Allied technological and industrial capacity surpasses that of Germany. • Submarine warfare in Atlantic proves ineffective. • North African front collapses after El Alamein in November 1942. • July 20, 1944: Disenchantment with Hitler’s military leadership leads to failed assassination attempt by Stauffenberg. • German preparation for D-Day invasion is misdirected. Note:  Many of the examples listed above fit under several of the headings. For instance, a student might correctly discuss the invasion of Russia as either a diplomatic or a military factor. The foregoing guide is just that, a guide. It is NOT a checklist.  