AP® European History 2004 Scoring Guidelines Form B The materials included in these files are intended for noncommercial use by  AP teachers for course and exam preparation; permission for any other use  must be sought from the Advanced Placement Program®. Teachers may reproduce them, in whole or in part, in limited quantities, for face-to-face teaching purposes but may not mass distribute the materials,  electronically or otherwise. This permission does not apply to any third-party copyrights contained herein. These materials and any copies  made of them may not be resold, and the copyright notices  must be retained as they appear here. The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity.  Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 4,500 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the  College Board serves over three million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. For further information, visit www.collegeboard.com Copyright © 2004 College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central,  AP Vertical Teams, APCD, Pacesetter, Pre-AP, SAT, Student Search Service, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the  College Entrance Examination Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the  College Entrance Examination Board and National Merit Scholarship Corporation.  Educational Testing Service and ETS are registered trademarks of Educational Testing Service.  Other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. For the College Board’s online home for AP professionals, visit AP Central at apcentral.collegeboard.com. “Analyze the concerns and goals of participants in the Pilgrimage of Grace and of those who opposed the movement.” BASIC CORE: 1 point each to a total of 6 points 1. Has an acceptable thesis. Thesis must be explicit, based on one or more documents. It may not be a simple rewording of the question or of the historical background. Thesis need not appear in the first paragraph. 2. Uses a majority of the documents. Uses at least six documents by reference to anything in the box, even if used incorrectly. They need not be cited by number or name. 3. Addresses all parts of the question. Even when there is no thesis, the essay can still offer evidence from the documents that defines the concerns and goals of the participants in the Pilgrimage of Grace and of those who opposed them. 4. Understands the basic meaning of the documents cited in the essay. May make a major misinterpretation of no more than one document; a major misinterpretation is one that leads to an inaccurate grouping or a false analysis. Consistent small errors equal one major error. Errors in attempts to use POV should be judged less severely. 5. Analyzes point of view or bias in at least three documents. Relates authorial point of view to author’s place OR Evaluates the reliability of the source OR Recognizes that different kinds of documents serve different purposes OR Analyzes tone or intent of documents (often expressed with emotional adverbs). N.B. In this DBQ consistent attribution will not be accepted for POV. 6. Analyzes documents by organizing them in at least three groups. A group must have at least two documents. Sub-groups within a larger grouping are acceptable. A fallacious grouping receives no credit. Examples of possible groups include: Economic impact of closing of monasteries (4,5,11) The role of the king (1,7,8,9) Fear of rebellion against authority (7,9,10) Religious goals and concerns (1,3,4,5,9) Concerns and goals over evil counselors (1,5,6,8) Concerns and goals over Cromwell (5,6) Concerns and goals of Robert Aske (5,11) Concerns over Scotland (2,9) Concerns over the poor (5,11) Concerns over the preservation of order (7,9) Concerns over violence, thievery (2,5) Concerns over political rights (5,6) Pro-Pilgrimage of Grace (1,2,3,4,5,6,11) Anti-Pilgrimage of Grace (7,9,10) EXPANDED CORE: 0-3 points to a total of 9 points Must earn all 6 points in the basic core before earning points in the expanded core. A student earns points to the degree to which he or she does one or more of the following: • Has a clear, analytical and comprehensive thesis • Uses all or almost all documents • Uses documents persuasively as evidence • Shows careful and insightful analysis of documents • Analyzes bias or point of view in at least four documents cited in the essay • Analyzes documents in additional ways; e.g., additional groups even if only one document, change over time, etc. • Brings in relevant “outside” historical content “Analyze the shifts in the European balance of power in the period between 1763 and 1848.” Scoring Standards Essay will have most of the following qualities with varying degrees of effectiveness: 9-8-7-6: Stronger • Has a clear, well-developed thesis • Is well-organized • Addresses the terms of the question: task(s), content, chronology • Supports the thesis with specific evidence • May contain minor errors; even a “9” need not be flawless Indicators: • Demonstrates understanding of the concept of the balance of power • Offers a broad and accurate chronological coverage, even if unbalanced at times • Supports with considerable specific evidence 5-4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic • Responds to the terms of the question unevenly: task(s), evidence, chronology • May contain factual and/or interpretive errors Indicators: • Addresses the concept of the balance of power but simplistically or superficially • May offer a narrower chronological coverage or a broad but superficial one • Discussion of shifts in the balance may be minimal or superficial • May support with limited evidence 3-2-1-0: Weaker Essays scored 0 or 1 may attempt to address the question but fail to do so. • Thesis confused, unfocused, or absent, or simply restates the question • Misconstrues the question, or omits major tasks • May contain major factual and/or interpretive errors Indicators: • Shows little or no awareness of the concept of the balance of power, or may misinterpret the concept altogether • May stray significantly outside the chronological period • May not address the concept of shifts in the balance of power- may simply describe some of the diplomacy of the era or domestic developments • Provides erroneous, irrelevant, or no supporting evidence — Essay completely off task or blank “To what extent did Romanticism challenge Enlightenment views of human beings and the natural world?” Scoring Standards Essay will have most of the following qualities with varying degrees of effectiveness: 9-8-7-6: Stronger • Has a clear, well-developed thesis • Is well-organized • Addresses the terms of the question: task(s), content, chronology • Supports the thesis with specific evidence • May contain minor errors; even a “9” need not be flawless Indicators: • Discusses at least one challenge posed by Romanticism to Enlightenment views on human beings and at least one challenge posed by Romanticism to Enlightenment views on the natural world, although the discussion may not be balanced (e.g., may offer greater treatment of Enlightenment views or of the Romantic challenge to views on human beings) • Provides some supporting evidence, although treatment may be generalized (e.g., may offer more evidence on one era or type of challenge) 5-4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic • Responds to the terms of the question unevenly: task(s), evidence, chronology • May contain factual and/or interpretive errors Indicators: • May treat the idea of challenge minimally or superficially • May only address the Romantic challenge to Enlightenment ideas about human beings or the natural world • Discussion of the challenge may be minimal or superficial, more descriptive than analytical • May provide minimal evidence 3-2-1-0: Weaker Essays scored 0 or 1 may attempt to address the question but fail to do so. • Thesis confused, unfocused, or absent, or simply restates the question • Misconstrues the question, or omits major tasks • May contain major factual and/or interpretive errors Indicators: • Fails to address the issue of the extent and nature of the challenge • May only describe the views of each era about human beings and/or the natural world • Does not discuss views of human beings or of the natural world • May be off-task, describing other aspects of the Enlightenment and/or the Romantics — Essay completely off task or blank “Contrast the ways in which the paintings shown express the artistic and intellectual concerns of the eras in which the works were created.” Scoring Standards Essay will have most of the following qualities with varying degrees of effectiveness: 9-8-7-6: Stronger • Has a clear, well-developed thesis • Is well-organized • Addresses the terms of the question: task(s), content, chronology • Supports the thesis with specific evidence • May contain minor errors; even a “9” need not be flawless Indicators: • May simply acknowledge the differences in artistic and intellectual concerns of the two paintings without developing its discussion • Defines and discusses the artistic and intellectual concerns of each painting • Links at least one of the paintings to the intellectual concerns of the era • Provides some supporting evidence to support thesis, although material may not be balanced (more on Raphael and the Italian Renaissance than Picasso and Modernism) 5-4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic • Responds to the terms of the question unevenly: task(s), evidence, chronology • May contain factual and/or interpretive errors Indicators: • May describe the artistic and intellectual concerns of one of the paintings and eras • May link one of the paintings to the intellectual concerns of the era in a minimal or superficial manner • Provides generalized or minimal supporting evidence 3-2-1-0: Weaker Essays scored 0 or 1 may attempt to address the question but fail to do so. • Thesis confused, unfocused, or absent, or simply restates the question • Misconstrues the question, or omits major tasks • May contain major factual and/or interpretive errors Indicators: • Provides no linkage between paintings and the concerns of the era • Misunderstands the artistic and intellectual concerns of the paintings and the eras in which the works were created — Essay completely off task or blank “Analyze the participation of European women in the economy and politics from 1914 to 1939. Use examples from at least TWO countries.” Scoring Standards Essay will have most of the following qualities with varying degrees of effectiveness: 9-8-7-6: Stronger • Has a clear, well-developed thesis • Is well-organized • Addresses the terms of the question: task(s), content, chronology • Supports the thesis with specific evidence • May contain minor errors; even a “9” need not be flawless Indicators: • Discusses participation of women in both the economy and politics, although the coverage may not be balanced (may devote more space to participation in politics than the economy, may not cover the entire chronological period) • Explicitly addresses the issue of participation in either politics or the economy in at least one country—discussion of participation in either politics or the economy may be implicit for the second country (e.g., the role of women as mothers and wives under some dictators) • May discuss some developments that fall outside the prescribed chronological period (e.g., the pre-World War I suffrage movement or women’s involvement in politics or the economy during World War II) • Provides some specific evidence to support discussion of Women’s participation in either politics or the economy 5-4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic • Responds to the terms of the question unevenly: task(s), evidence, chronology • May contain factual and/or interpretive errors Indicators: • Offers generalized account of the participation of women in the economy or politics. Social developments connected to politics and/or the economy represent acceptable evidence (e.g., the pressure on women in Nazi Germany to be good wives and mothers). • May not identify developments in specific countries • Much of the supporting evidence may fall outside the prescribed time period • Offers generalized evidence to support its arguments 3-2-1-0: Weaker Essays scored 0 or 1 may attempt to address the question but fail to do so. • Thesis confused, unfocused, or absent, or simply restates the question • Misconstrues the question, or omits major tasks • May contain major factual and/or interpretive errors Indicators: • May offer a polemical or anachronistic argument (diatribe on gender discrimination, American women’s history, post-1945 period, and discussion of Mary Wollstonecraft) • Does not address the concept of participation but only offers a description of women’s lives during the period 1914-1939 — Essay completely off task or blank “Compare and contrast the ways that seventeenth-century absolute monarchs and twentieth-century dictators gained and maintained their power.” Scoring Standards Essay will have most of the following qualities with varying degrees of effectiveness: 9-8-7-6: Stronger • Has a clear, well-developed thesis • Is well-organized • Addresses the terms of the question: task(s), content, chronology • Supports the thesis with specific evidence • May contain minor errors; even a “9” need not be flawless Indicators: • May discuss similarities and differences in the ways in which absolute monarchs and twentieth-century dictators gained and maintained power, although discussion may not be balanced (students may devote almost all of their analysis to differences; how power was maintained may receive greater attention than how power was gained) • May discuss only one absolute monarchy and one twentieth-century dictator • Provides considerable supporting evidence, even if treatment is not entirely balanced • May venture slightly out of the prescribed chronological time periods (e.g., discusses Peter the Great’s reforms) 5-4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic • Responds to the terms of the question unevenly: task(s), evidence, chronology • May contain factual and/or interpretive errors Indicators: • May discuss a number of similarities and differences superficially OR only one similarity and one difference • Discusses only one topic (how power was gained or how power was maintained), but not both • Provides limited or generalized evidence 3-2-1-0: Weaker Essays scored 0 or 1 may attempt to address the question but fail to do so. • Thesis confused, unfocused, or absent, or simply restates the question • Misconstrues the question, or omits major tasks • May contain major factual and/or interpretive errors Indicators: • May simply describe absolute monarchs and/or twentieth-century dictators • Fails to address either how power was gained or how power was maintained • May stray significantly outside the chronological periods of the question (e.g., may refer to enlightened despots) — Essay completely off task or blank “Explain the reasons for the rise of the Netherlands as a leading commercial power in the period 1550 to 1650.” Scoring Standards Essay will have most of the following qualities with varying degrees of effectiveness: 9-8-7-6: Stronger • Has a clear, well-developed thesis • Is well-organized • Addresses the terms of the question: task(s), content, chronology • Supports the thesis with specific evidence • May contain minor errors; even a “9” need not be flawless Indicators: • Identifies and explains two or more factors responsible for the commercial success of the Netherlands in the period 1550-1650 • Provides specific supporting evidence to support its explanation of the commercial success of the Netherlands 5-4: Mixed • Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic • Responds to the terms of the question unevenly: task(s), evidence, chronology • May contain factual and/or interpretive errors Indicators: • May identify and discuss one factor thoroughly OR more than one factor superficially • Provides some supporting evidence 3-2-1-0: Weaker Essays scored 0 or 1 may attempt to address the question but fail to do so. • Thesis confused, unfocused, or absent, or simply restates the question • Misconstrues the question, or omits major tasks • May contain major factual and/or interpretive errors Indicators: • May offer minimal or no explanation of reasons for commercial success of the Netherlands • Evidence provided is minimal, absent, or irrelevant • Discussion may be off-task; may focus on the Dutch Revolt, or the Wars of Religion, the Dutch wars with Louis XIV and/or England, or the decline of the Dutch Netherlands • May stray significantly outside the required chronological period (e.g., the Agricultural and/or Industrial Revolution) — Essay completely off task or blank 