Question 1  7 points  Part (a): 2 points  One point is earned for a correct definition of congressional reapportionment. One point is earned for a correct explanation of why reapportionment is important to states.  An acceptable definition of congressional reapportionment is:  • The reallocation of the number of representatives each state has in the House of Representatives.  Acceptable explanations of why congressional reapportionment is important to states are:  • Reapportionment increases or decreases the number of seats a state has in the House/Congress (not the Senate). • More representatives mean that a state has more influence.  • Reapportionment increases or decreases a state’s number of electoral votes.   NOTE: The explanation point must be tied to an appropriate definition of reapportionment.   Part (b): 1 point  One point is earned for a correct definition of congressional redistricting. An acceptable definition is:  • The drawing/redrawing of House/congressional (not Senate) district lines.  Part (c): 2 points  One point is earned for each of two explanations of the goals of politicians when they gerrymander during redistricting. Acceptable explanations may include:  • To enhance political party strength/to minimize the strength of the opposition party. • To protect incumbents/to discourage challengers.  • To increase minority representation/to decrease minority representation. • To punish foes/to reward friends.  NOTE: “Cracking” or “packing” must be tied to one of the above in order to earn the explanation point.  Question 1 (continued)  Part (d): 2 points  One point is earned for each of two descriptions of limits that the United States Supreme Court has placed on congressional redistricting.  Acceptable descriptions may include:  • Districts must be equally populated. • Lines must be contiguous or connected. • Redistricting cannot dilute minority voting strength. • District lines cannot be drawn solely based upon race. • Districts must be compact. • Communities of interest must be protected.  A score of zero (0) is earned for an attempted answer that earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is earned for a blank or off-task answer. Question 2  6 points  Part (a): 2 points  One point is earned for each of two descriptions of formal, enumerated powers that enable the president to exert influence over domestic policy. Acceptable descriptions may include:  • Legislative powers (veto, pocket veto, signing legislation). • State of the Union address. • Appointment power (to a domestic office). • Calling Congress into session. • Chief executive role (“faithfully execute the law” clause). • Commander-in-chief role (must connect it to domestic policy in order to earn the point).  Part (b): 4 points  One point is earned for each of two definitions and two explanations of limits to the president’s ability to influence domestic policymaking in Congress. Explanations must be tied to a correct, though not necessarily complete, definition.      Correct Definition      Examples of Acceptable Explanations  Mandatory Spending  Spending not controlled by annual budget decisions (nondiscretionary spending, automatic spending, etc.)  • Budgetary constraints make it difficult to accomplish policy goals. • It is difficult to make budget cuts that might accomplish policy goals.  Party Polarization  Increased interparty differences  • Opposing party may block policy goals. • There is a lack of moderates with whom to build coalitions.  Lame-Duck Period  Period of time in which an officeholder’s term is coming to an end  • President’s power is perceived as being diminished. • Congress is less responsive to the president.   A score of zero (0) is earned for an attempted answer that earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is earned for a blank or off-task answer.  Question 3  6 points  Part (a): 1 point  One point is earned for a correct definition of fiscal policy. Acceptable definitions include:  • Taxing and/or spending • The budget  Part (b): 1 point  One point is earned for correctly describing a significant way the executive branch influences fiscal policy. Acceptable descriptions include:  • The president proposes/prepares the federal budget. • The president signs/vetoes legislation (related to taxing, spending, and borrowing, not generic). • The White House Office of Management and Budget (OMB) recommends the budget.  Part (c): 1 point  One point is earned for correctly describing a significant way the legislative branch influences fiscal policy. Acceptable descriptions include:  • Congress passes the federal budget. • Congress acts on tax and spending legislation. • The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) advises Congress on economic policies.  Part (d): 1 point  One point is earned for a correct definition of monetary policy. Acceptable definitions include:  • Regulating the money supply. • Controlling inflation/deflation. • Adjusting interest rates to regulate the economy. • Adjusting bank reserve requirements. • The cost of money. Question 3 (continued)  Part (e): 2 points  One point is earned for each of two explanations of why the Federal Reserve Board is given independence in establishing monetary policy. Acceptable explanations include:  • It removes politics from monetary policy decision making. • Congress/the president can abdicate responsibility for difficult decisions by delegating decision-making power. • The Federal Reserve Board relies on expertise when making decisions. • The Federal Reserve Board makes economic policies efficiently.  A score of zero (0) is earned for an attempted answer that earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is earned for a blank or off-task answer. Question 4  5 points  Part (a): 2 points  One point is earned for each of two explanations of measures taken by some states that affected voter turnout among African American citizens. Acceptable explanations are:  • Literacy tests • Poll taxes • Grandfather clauses • Dilution of voting strength through redistricting • White primaries • Election procedures (notification, access)  Part (b): 2 points  One point is earned for each of two descriptions of alternative forms of participation. Acceptable descriptions are:  • Demonstrations/protests/public rallies/civil disobedience • Organized interest-group activity (e.g., NAACP) • Courts/litigation • Boycotts • Election activities other than voting (campaigning, donating)  Part (c): 1 point    One point is earned for a correct explanation of why an alternative form of participation was effective in changing civil rights policies based on the response in (b).  The response must explain how or why policy outputs or outcomes result from participation, including the following three elements:  • Participation • Linkage mechanism • Policy output or outcome  A score of zero (0) is earned for an attempted answer that earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is earned for a blank or off-task answer.            AP® United States Government and Politics 2008 Scoring Guidelines                 The College Board: Connecting Students to College Success   The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 5,400 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves seven million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns.   © 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. College Board, AP Central, Advanced Placement Program, AP, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Board and National Merit Scholarship Corporation. All other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html.  Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. AP Central is the online home for AP teachers: apcentral.collegeboard.com.  