          AP® United States Government and Politics 2009 Scoring Guidelines                  The College Board  The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 5,600 schools, colleges, universities and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves seven million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools and 3,800 colleges through major programs and services in college readiness, college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT® and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities and concerns.   © 2009 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Board and National Merit Scholarship Corporation.   Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html.  Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. AP Central® is the official online home for AP teachers: apcentral.collegeboard.com.  Question 1  6 points  Part (a): 2 points   One point is earned for identifying the House of Representatives or Congress. One point is earned for an explanation of how the House or Congress is most closely tied to citizens.  Acceptable explanations are: • Members of the House are more directly elected than the president and were originally more directly elected than members of the Senate. • The shorter term length (or frequent elections) ties them to the people. • Members must live in the state they represent. • House members represent relatively small districts.  Part (b): 2 points  One point is earned for each of two explanations. Each explanation must show how a constitutional provision or principle limits majority rule.    Any of the following can be used as a reference point in the explanation of how majority rule is limited (this is not an exhaustive list):    Provisions that limit how the majority can have an impact on government   Provisions that limit the power  of government  • Electoral college • U.S. senators originally selected by state legislatures • Longer terms of senators • Independent judiciary • Life tenure for U.S. Supreme Court justices • Appointment process • Representative form of government  • Bill of Rights • Expressed powers • Specific prohibitions (e.g., ex post facto laws, bills of attainder) • Separation of powers • Checks and balances  • Federalism • Bicameralism   Question 1 (continued)  Part (c): 2 points  One point is earned for each of two explanations. Each explanation must state how the development cited moved the process from a less democratic system to a more democratic system in the twentieth century.  Acceptable explanations must indicate how the United States became more democratic through: • Primary elections—voters gained more control over the nomination process/control taken away from political parties. • Seventeenth Amendment—mandated direct election of U.S. senators. • Expansion of suffrage—led to a more representative set of voters/more eligible voters.  A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is attempted but that earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is assigned to a blank or off-task answer. Question 2  7 points  Part (a): 2 points  One point is earned for describing any aspect of the relationship between age and the likelihood of voting. Acceptable descriptions for age include: • Older people are more likely to vote. • Turnout is lowest for young people. • The likelihood of voting declines in the oldest populations.  One point is earned for describing the relationship between education and the likelihood of voting. The only acceptable descriptions for education are: • People with more education are more likely to vote. • People with less education are less likely to vote.  Part (b): 2 points  One point is earned for identifying an electoral requirement that decreases voter turnout.  Acceptable examples are: • Citizenship • Age • Disfranchisement of certain groups (felons, the mentally incompetent)  • Residency • Registration • Limited opportunities to vote (midweek, limited hours, single day)  • Need to show identification • Generally have to vote in person • Closed primaries • Process of obtaining absentee ballots   One point is earned for explaining how or why the requirement cited decreases the likelihood of voting. Acceptable explanations include: • The requirement makes a person ineligible to vote.  • The requirement puts up obstacles or makes it harder to vote. Question 2 (continued)  Part (c): 3 points  One point is earned for identifying one of the following linkage institutions:  • Media • Interest groups (PACs) • Political parties  One point is earned for each of two explanations. The student must explain how the media, interest groups, or political parties connect citizens to the government. (Note: the student must earn the point for identifying an institution in order to receive a point for explaining how that institution connects citizens to the government.)    Media  Interest Groups/ PACs  Parties   “Ways” that connect  • Convey the views of the people to government  • Convey information about the government to the people   • Express group members’ preferences to policymakers • Convey policy information to group members • Raise and spend money to advocate for the interests of the group with policymakers   • Gather information about voters for use by candidates and policymakers  • Provide information to voters about candidates running for office  • Connect  voters to elected officials/candidates through campaign activities   “Ways” in which connections are made  • Interviewing citizens  • Reporting on government activities • Presenting poll results • Interviewing public officials • Covering protests and/or opposition • Providing an outlet for citizen opinion  • Letter-writing campaigns • Campaign activities • Lobbying • Grassroots movement • Litigation • Media campaigns • Disseminating information about government affairs   • Campaigns • Mailings • Voter mobilization  • Recruiting candidates • Recruiting activists • Endorsing party platforms • Funding candidates • Aggregating interests • Articulating interests • Mobilizing interests   Question 2 (continued)  Simply identifying and/or describing items in the second row of the table is not sufficient to earn a point.  A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is attempted but that earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is assigned to a blank or off-task answer. Question 3  6 points  Part (a): 2 points  One point is earned for each of two descriptions of majority party advantage in the House of Representatives.   The description must include three components:   • Majority party  • Advantage   • Factual statement about the advantage    Acceptable answers may include: • Holds committee chairs • Controls Rules Committee • Sets the agenda • Controls debate • Chooses Speaker of the House • Holds majority on each committee • Assigns bills to committees    Part (b): 2 points  One point is earned for each of two descriptions of rules differences between the House and Senate.  Acceptable answers may include:    House  Senate  Procedures and rules  More formal  Less formal  Filibuster  No  Yes  Holds  No  Yes  Unanimous consent agreements  No  Yes  Germaneness requirement  Yes  No  Rules Committee  Yes  No   Question 3 (continued)  Part (c): 2 points  One point is earned for each of two explanations of how a rules difference identified in part (b) affects passage of a bill in one chamber as opposed to the other. Acceptable answers may include:  • Filibuster—even though the House may pass a bill, the Senate can kill the bill with a filibuster. • Holds—even though the House may pass a bill, the Senate can delay or stop it with a hold. • Unanimous consent agreements—the Senate can ease passage of a bill with unanimous consent agreements, while the House has no such mechanism. • Germaneness—the Senate can add unrelated content that members of the House might find objectionable. • Rules Committee—even though the Senate may pass a bill, the House Rules Committee can hinder passage of that bill in the House.  A score of zero (0) is assigned to an attempted answer that earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is assigned to a blank or off-task answer. Question 4  6 points  Part (a): 1 point  One point is earned for a correct definition of policy agenda. A correct definition must include each of the following:  • A policy agenda is a set of issues, problems, or subjects • that gets the attention of/is viewed as important by • people involved in policymaking (e.g., government officials, government decision-makers).  Part (b): 1 point  One point is earned for a correct explanation of how the national news media engage in agenda setting.  A correct explanation must include each of the following:  • Raise awareness, provide information, draw attention, demonstrate the importance or consequences of the problem, or get the public’s attention. • Get the attention of government/policymakers.  Part (c): 1 point  One point is earned for an explanation of the primary reason the president has an advantage over Congress in gaining media attention. A correct response must include the following: • An explanation that the president is one person, while Congress is composed of many members. • An explanation of how that fact gives the president an advantage over Congress in gaining media attention.  Possible explanations might include:  • The president speaks with a single voice, while Congress has many voices. • The president represents the nation; members of Congress represent states/districts. • The president is the national leader/leader of the country. • The president is more powerful than any single member of Congress. • The president has constitutional powers that Congress does not have.  Part (d): 2 points  One point is earned for each of two responses: one explaining the difference in viewing patterns of older and younger age-groups, and one explaining the change in viewing habits from 1974 to 2002 for all age-groups: • Young people view less TV news than older people./Older people view more TV news than younger people. • People in all age categories viewed less TV news in 2002 than they did in 1974.  Question 4 (continued)  Part (e): 1 point  One point is earned for describing one implication for presidents in their use of the media to promote their objectives to the public. The answer must state at least one of the following: • Presidents must rely on alternative media to gain the attention of the public. • Presidents purposely target older viewers through the use of nightly news programs. • The nightly news is not as effective in promoting the president’s agenda as it used to be.   A score of zero (0) is assigned to an attempted answer that earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is assigned to a blank or off-task answer. 