Question 1  5 points  Part (a): 2 points  One point is earned for an accurate description of a power of the president in each of the following roles:  • Chief legislator: agenda-setting; veto; message power/State of the Union address; going public/bully pulpit • Chief bureaucrat: appointments (e.g., vetting); executive orders; manage/oversee the bureaucracy; use White House staff to control bureaucrats (e.g., Office of Management and Budget); prioritize agency activities  Part (b): 2 points  One point is earned for each of the following accurate explanations of limits on the president’s influence on policymaking:  • Civil service employees: bureaucratic discretion; agency view; civil service protection; interest       group capture of agencies; expertise • The Supreme Court: declares presidential actions unconstitutional   Part (c): 1 point  One point is earned for an accurate description of the influence of divided government on the policymaking process. Descriptions must demonstrate an understanding of the political concept of divided government and then describe the influence it has on policymaking. Description may include:  • Control of Congress by one party and control of the presidency by the other party makes it more difficult to enact legislation. • Control of the two chambers of Congress by opposing political parties makes it more difficult to pass legislation.   A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is off-task or is attempted but earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is assigned to an answer that is blank.  Question 2   5 points  Part (a): 1 point   One point is earned for an accurate comparison of state sovereignty under the Articles of Confederation and state sovereignty under the Constitution.   Correct comparisons will state that states were sovereign under the Articles of Confederation, but under the Constitution they have shared power/limited power.  Part (b): 2 points  One point is earned for each of two accurate explanations of how each of the following has been used to expand the power of the federal government over the states:   • Commerce clause o Federal government/Congress controls interstate commerce (transportation, civil rights, etc.), and the states cannot control; it is an exclusive federal authority. o Federal government/U.S. Supreme Court increases the power of the federal government through decisions (such as Gibbons, Heart of Atlanta, etc.), and the states cannot; it is an exclusive federal authority.  • Mandates — the federal government directs the states to implement policies (such as the American with Disabilities Act (ADA), school integration, busing, etc.), thus reducing state discretion and increasing federal discretion  Part (c): 2 points  One point is earned for an accurate explanation of how each of the following has played a role in the devolution of power from the national government to the states:   • Block grants — broad federal funding that allows states to have more discretion in how funding is spent, thus states have greater flexibility in policy implementation. • Supreme Court decisions  o Struck down encroachments of national government attempts to take states’ power, thereby protecting states’ powers.  o Through the use of judicial review, state power is protected.   A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is off-task or is attempted but earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is assigned to an answer that is blank. Question 3  5 points  Part (a): 1 point  One point is earned for describing a reason that the framers chose the electoral college method to elect the president. Possible descriptions include:  • Compromise between big and small states • Protection against direct election by uninformed citizens/cater to elites • Did not trust the people, Congress, or state legislatures to solely select president • Reinforced federalism and gave states a role in presidential selection  Part (b): 1 point  One point is earned for an accurate description of the message in the cartoon. Possible descriptions include:  • The candidates focus only on battleground or swing states • Many states are ignored by presidential candidates  Simply using the term, “battleground state” or “swing state” is not enough; the response must describe what is unique about a battleground or swing state  Part (c): 1 point  • One point is earned for an accurate explanation of why California, Texas, and New York do not appear prominently in the cartoon. The explanations may include that these states are not competitive because one party possesses disproportionate influence or power (or a variation thereof).  Part (d): 2 points  One point is earned for each of two accurate descriptions of campaign tactics presidential candidates use to win the key states identified in the cartoon. They may include:   • Concentration of money in those states • More TV ads and use of media in those states • Bigger campaign organizations in those states • More travel to/make more campaign appearances in the key states • Focus on issues that swing voters in that state care about • Selection of a running mate from one of the key states   A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is off-task or is attempted but earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is assigned to an answer that is blank. Question 4  7 points  Part (a): 1 point  One point is earned for a correct description of the difference between civil rights and civil liberties. The response must include both of the following:   • Civil rights protect groups from discrimination. • Civil liberties protect individuals from government actions.  Part (b): 1 point  One point is earned for a correct identification of the equal protection clause.  Part (c): 2 points  One point is earned for a correct description of a specific legislative action that extended civil rights to each of the following:  • Women: right to vote; equal pay for equal work; equality in academics and athletics; laws expanding role of women in the military, etc. • Persons with disabilities: public accommodations; educational accommodations, etc.  Part (d): 1 point  One point is earned for a correct identification of the due process clause.  Part (e): 2 points  One point is earned for each of two accurate explanations of how civil liberties were incorporated by the Supreme Court by the following cases:  • Gideon v. Wainwright — right to an attorney for indigents • Mapp v. Ohio — illegally seized evidence cannot be used in court; exclusionary rule • Miranda v. Arizona — must be informed of rights: no self-incrimination; right to counsel, etc.  NOTE: The response must include reference to incorporation (i.e., application to the states or police action)   A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is off-task or is attempted but earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is assigned to an answer that is blank.        AP® United States Government and Politics 2015 Scoring Guidelines     © 2015 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board.  Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org.                        