AP® United States Government & Politics 2003 Free-Response Questions The materials included in these files are intended for use by AP teachers for course and exam preparation; permission for any other use must be sought from the Advanced Placement Program®. Teachers may reproduce them, in whole or in part, in limited quantities for noncommercial, face-to-face teaching purposes. This permission does not apply to any third-party copyrights contained herein. This material may not be mass distributed, electronically or otherwise. These materials and any copies made of them may not be resold, and the copyright notices must be retained as they appear here. These materials were produced by Educational Testing Service® (ETS®), which develops and administers the examinations of the Advanced Placement Program for the College Board. The College Board and Educational Testing Service (ETS) are dedicated to the principle of equal opportunity, and their programs, services, and employment policies are guided by that principle. The College Board is a national nonprofit membership association whose mission is to prepare, inspire, and connect students to college and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 4,300 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves over three million students and their parents, 22,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of equity and excellence, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. For further information, visit www.collegeboard.com Copyright © 2003 College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Vertical Teams, APCD, Pacesetter, Pre-AP, SAT, Student Search Service, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board. AP Central is a trademark owned by the College Entrance Examination Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark jointly owned by the College Entrance Examination Board and the National Merit Scholarship Corporation. Educational Testing Service and ETS are registered trademarks of Educational Testing Service. Other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. For the College Board’s online home for AP professionals, visit AP Central at apcentral.collegeboard.com. 2003 AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS SECTION II Time—100 minutes Directions:  You have 100 minutes to answer all four of the following questions. Unless the directions indicate otherwise, respond to all parts of all four questions. It is suggested that you take a few minutes to plan and outline each answer. Spend approximately one-fourth of your time (25 minutes) on each question. In your response, use substantive examples where appropriate. Make certain to number each of your answers as the question is numbered below. 1. Presidential approval ratings fluctuate over the course of each presidential administration. (a) Identify two factors that decrease presidential approval ratings, and explain why each factor has that effect. (b) Identify two factors that increase presidential approval ratings, and explain why each factor has that effect. 2. Citizens often choose to participate in the political process in ways other than voting. (a) Identify two forms of participation in the political process other than voting. (b) Explain two advantages of each form of participation you identified in (a). 3. Using the data in the graph above and your knowledge of United States politics, perform the following tasks. (a) Identify two trends shown in the graph. (b) Explain how each of the following contributes to the difference between the federal and the state and local lines in the graph. • Block grants • Federal mandates Copyright © 2003 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. Available to AP professionals at apcentral.collegeboard.com and to students and parents at www.collegeboard.com/apstudents. GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 2 2003 AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 4. Both party leadership and committees in Congress play key roles in the legislative process. (a) Define two of the following elements of the congressional committee system and explain how each influences the legislative process. • Specialization • Reciprocity/logrolling • Party representation on committees (b) Identify two ways party leadership in Congress can influence the legislative process, and explain how each way influences the process. END OF EXAMINATION Copyright © 2003 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. Available to AP professionals at apcentral.collegeboard.com and to students and parents at www.collegeboard.com/apstudents. 3 