AP_logo_K.jpgAP® United States Government and Politics 2012 Free-Response Questions About the College Board The College Board is a mission-driven not-for-profit organization that connects students to college success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the College Board was created to expand access to higher education. Today, the membership association is made up of more than 5,900 of the world’s leading educational institutions and is dedicated to promoting excellence and equity in education. Each year, the College Board helps more than seven million students prepare for a successful transition to college through programs and services in college readiness and college success — including the SAT® and the Advanced Placement Program®. The organization also serves the education community through research and advocacy on behalf of students, educators, and schools. © 2012 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. Admitted Class Evaluation Service and inspiring minds are trademarks owned by the College Board. All other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: www.collegeboard.org/inquiry/cbpermit.html. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org. CBLogoK_high2012 AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS  FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS SECTION II Time—1 hour and 40 minutes Directions:  You have 100 minutes to answer all four of the following questions. Unless the directions indicate otherwise, respond to all parts of all four questions. It is suggested that you take a few minutes to plan and outline each answer. Spend approximately one-fourth of your time (25 minutes) on each question. In your response, use substantive examples where appropriate.  1. Members of Congress are charged with three primary duties—writing laws, overseeing the implementation of laws, and serving the needs of their constituents. (a) Describe the role of each of the following in lawmaking.  • Senate filibuster • House Rules Committee • Conference committee (b) Describe one method by which Congress exercises oversight of the federal bureaucracy.  (c) Explain how casework affects members’ attention to legislation. © 2012 The College Board. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -2-2012 AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS  FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 2. (a) Using the chart above, compare minority representation in 1960 and 2010.  (b) Explain how each of the following assisted in the removal of barriers to minority voting.  • Voting Rights Act of 1965 • Twenty-fourth Amendment  (c) Identify one barrier that currently impedes minority representation in Congress. Explain why the barrier  you identified inhibits minority representation in Congress. © 2012 The College Board. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -3-2012 AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS  FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 3. The judicial branch is often assumed to be insulated from politics. However, politics affects many aspects of the judiciary. (a) Describe two political factors that affect presidents’ decisions to appoint members of the federal judiciary.  (b) Identify two political factors that affect the confirmation process of a president’s nominees and explain how each factor complicates a confirmation.  (c) Explain how one legislative power serves as a check on court decisions.  (d) Explain how one executive power serves as a check on court decisions. 4. Interest groups seek to influence political processes in ways that benefit their members. In doing so, however, they may not act in the overall public interest. (a) Describe two techniques interest groups use to influence elections.  (b) Explain how interest groups use each of the following to influence government decision making.  • Issue networks (also known as iron triangles) • Amicus curiae briefs (c) Explain how each of the following serves to limit interest group influence.  • The media • Pluralism STOP END OF EXAM © 2012 The College Board. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. -4-