The test preparation materials  in this document include images for which descriptions are provided. In a standard test, the images are presented without descriptions. In this document, descriptions are included with the images so that assistive technology users will have an understanding of what is in each image. However, some of the image descriptions may not be valid for testing purposes; and in certain cases we cannot make all of the content accessible due to the construct or design of particular test questions.  Therefore, on an actual test in an alternate format, some questions may be omitted if they include images that cannot be described without affecting the question’s validity. If any questions are omitted, the scoring rules for the test take such omissions into account to make sure that you are neither advantaged nor disadvantaged by the omissions and that your scores are comparable to those of individuals taking another version of the test.A P logoAP® United States Government and Politics 2015 Free-Response Questions © 2015 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board.  Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org. The College Board logoUNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS SECTION II Time—1 hour and 40 minutes Directions:  You have 100 minutes to answer all four of the following questions. Unless the directions indicate otherwise, respond to all parts of all four questions. It is suggested that you take a few minutes to plan and outline each answer. Spend approximately one-fourth of your time (25 minutes) on each question. In your response, use substantive examples where appropriate.  1.American politics has often been called an “invitation to struggle.” Although in recent years the president hasbeen thought to have an advantage in policy making, there are still constraints on the power of the president.(a) Describe a power of the president in each of the following roles.Chief legislatorChief bureaucrat or chief administrator(b) Explain how each of the following limits the president’s influence in policy making. Civil service employeesThe Supreme Court(c) Describe the influence of divided government on the policy-making process. 2.The framers of the Constitution devised a federal system of government that affected the relationship betweenthe national and state governments.(a) Compare state sovereignty under the Articles of Confederation and under the Constitution.(b) Explain how each of the following has been used to expand the power of the federal government overthe states. Commerce clauseMandates(c) Explain how each of the following has played a role in the devolution of power from the national government to the states. Block grantsSupreme Court decisionsThe figure shows a cartoon titled, Map of the U. S. open parenthesis, As viewed by the presidential candidates, close parenthesis. The map is drawn in a distorted fashion where the western part of the United States is smaller in height than the eastern part, and is tilted slightly down and to the left.  Five states are labeled and drawn larger than all others: Colorado, Wisconsin, Ohio, Virgina, and Florida.CARLSON © 2012 Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. Reprinted  with permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights reserved.3.The framers created the electoral college to elect the president of the United States. This system influences thecampaign strategies of presidential candidates.(a) Describe one reason that the framers chose to use the electoral college as the method to elect thepresident. (b) Describe the message the cartoon above conveys about presidential elections. (c) Explain why California, Texas, and New York do not appear prominently in the cartoon above. (d) Describe two campaign tactics presidential candidates use to win the key states identified in the  cartoon above.  4.The Fourteenth Amendment protects civil rights and civil liberties.(a) Describe the difference between civil rights and civil liberties.(b) Identify the primary clause of the Fourteenth Amendment that is used to extend civil rights.(c) Describe a specific legislative action that extended civil rights to each of the following.WomenPersons with disabilities(d) Identify the primary clause of the Fourteenth Amendment that is used to extend civil liberties. (e) Explain how civil liberties were incorporated by the Supreme Court in two of the following cases. Gideon v. WainwrightMapp v. OhioMiranda v. ArizonaSTOPEND OF EXAM 