A P College Board2021 AP® United States Government and Politics Free-Response Questions Set 1 © 2021 College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of College Board. Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org. UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS SECTION II Time—1 hour and 40 minutes 4 Questions Directions: You have 1 hour and 40 minutes to answer all four of the following questions. It is suggested that you spend approximately 20 minutes each on Questions 1, 2, and 3 and 40 minutes on Question 4. Unless directions indicate otherwise, respond to all parts of all four questions. In your response, use substantive examples where appropriate. It is recommended that you take a few minutes to plan each answer. You may plan your answers in this orange booklet, but no credit will be given for anything written in this booklet. You will only earn credit for what you write in the separate Free Response booklet. 1.In April of 2018, Mark Zuckerberg, the founder of the social media company Facebook, was called to testify before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary and the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation about, among other things, a data leak that led to 87 million Facebook users’ private information being sold without their consent. Senators questioned Zuckerberg about whether Facebook could adequately regulate itself and protect personal information or whether Congress should intervene. Zuckerberg defended the company, emphasizing its mission to better connect the world. In response, Zuckerberg stated, “My position is not that there should be no regulation. I think the real question, as the Internet becomes more important in people’s lives, is what is the right regulation, not whether there should be or not.” After reading the scenario, respond to A, B, and C below. A.Referencing the scenario, describe the enumerated power in Article I of the Constitution that gives Congress the authority to regulate a business like the one above. B.Explain how the two-chamber structure of the legislature affects the ability of Congress to exercise the power described in Part A. C.If Congress decides to regulate how social media companies gather and use the data of their users, explain how these companies could use the political process to ensure that the new regulation does not negatively affect them. Cabinet Diversity by President, 1981–2017 The figure presents a horizontal bar graph titled “Cabinet Diversity by President, 1981 to 2017.” The vertical axis has five presidents indicated. The graph is divided vertically into three separate sections. The sections are labeled as follows: Women, Racial/Ethnic Minorities, and White Men. Each president on the vertical axis has three bars, with one bar in each section. The data presented by the bars are as follows. Reagan, Republican, 1981 to 1989. Women, 10%. Racial/Ethnic Minorities, 10%. White Men, 81%. G. H. W. Bush, Republican, 1989 to 1993. Women, 14%. Racial/Ethnic Minorities, 19%. White Men, 67%. Clinton, Democrat, 1993 to 2001. Women, 29%. Racial/Ethnic Minorities, 29%. White Men, 48%. G. W. Bush, Republican, 2001 to 2009. Women, 18%. Racial/Ethnic Minorities, 27%. White Men, 59%. Obama, Democrat, 2009 to 2017. Women, 36%. Racial/Ethnic Minorities, 41%. White Men, 36%.Source: Georgia Public Broadcasting News, 2017 2.Use the bar graphs to answer the following questions. A.Identify the president who had the highest percentage of women and racial/ethnic minorities serving in the Cabinet. B.Describe a pattern in the percentage of racial and ethnic minorities serving in Cabinet positions. C.Draw a conclusion about the political parties and the diversity of Cabinet appointments as shown in the bar graphs. D.Explain how interest groups can influence presidential Cabinet appointments as shown in the bar graphs. This question requires you to compare a Supreme Court case you studied in class with one you have not studied in class. A summary of the Supreme Court case you did not study in class is presented below and provides all of the information you need to know about this case to answer the prompt. McCutcheon v.  Federal Election Commission (2013) 3.Alabama businessman Shaun McCutcheon contributed $33,088 to sixteen different candidates running for federal office in 2012. His donations exceeded the aggregate (total) campaign finance limit established by the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act (BCRA) of 2002. This law limited the total amount of political contributions that an individual could make in a given two-year election period to federal candidates, federal political action committees, and political parties. In the subsequent case, McCutcheon v.  Federal Election Commission (2013), the Court ruled in a 5–4 decision that limits on the amount of political contributions established by the BCRA are unconstitutional. The Court held that “contributing money to a candidate is an exercise of an individual’s right to participate in the electoral process. . . . A restriction on how many candidates and committees an individual may support is hardly a ‘modest restraint’ on those rights. The government may no more restrict how many candidates or causes a donor may support than it may tell a newspaper how many candidates it may endorse.” A.Identify the civil liberty that is common in both Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission (2010) and McCutcheon v.  Federal Election Commission (2013). B.Explain how the decision in Citizens United v.  Federal Election Commission relates to the reasoning in McCutcheon v.  Federal Election Commission. C.Explain how the decision in McCutcheon v.  Federal Election Commission can be used to support the participatory, pluralist, or elite model of democracy. 4. Environmental regulation is a complex policy area that involves both the states and the federal government. Develop an argument that takes a position on whether the federal government should be primarily responsible for managing environmental policy or if it should be the responsibility of the states. Use at least one piece of evidence from one of the following foundational documents: Brutus 1 The Federalist 10 The Preamble of the United States Constitution In your response, you should do the following: Respond to the prompt with a defensible claim or thesis that establishes a line of reasoning. Support your claim with at least TWO pieces of specific and relevant evidence. One piece of evidence must come from one of the foundational documents listed above. A second piece of evidence can come from any other foundational document not used as your first piece of evidence, or it may be from your knowledge of course concepts. Use reasoning to explain why your evidence supports your claim or thesis. Respond to an opposing or alternate perspective using refutation, concession, or rebuttal. STOP END OF EXAM 