AP® United States Government and Politics 2004 Free-Response Questions The materials included in these files are intended for noncommercial use by  AP teachers for course and exam preparation; permission for any other use  must be sought from the Advanced Placement Program®. Teachers may reproduce them, in whole or in part, in limited quantities, for face-to-face teaching purposes but may not mass distribute the materials,  electronically or otherwise. This permission does not apply to any third-party copyrights contained herein. These materials and any copies  made of them may not be resold, and the copyright notices  must be retained as they appear here. The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity.  Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 4,500 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the  College Board serves over three million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. For further information, visit www.collegeboard.com Copyright © 2004 College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central,  AP Vertical Teams, APCD, Pacesetter, Pre-AP, SAT, Student Search Service, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the  College Entrance Examination Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark jointly owned by the  College Entrance Examination Board and the National Merit Scholarship Corporation.  Educational Testing Service and ETS are registered trademarks of Educational Testing Service.  Other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. For the College Board’s online home for AP professionals, visit AP Central at apcentral.collegeboard.com. 2004 AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS SECTION II Time—100 minutes Directions:  You have 100 minutes to answer all four of the following questions. Unless the directions indicate otherwise, respond to all parts of all four questions. It is suggested that you take a few minutes to plan and outline each answer. Spend approximately one-fourth of your time (25 minutes) on each question. In your response, use substantive examples where appropriate. Make certain to number each of your answers as the question is numbered below. 1. Presidents are generally thought to have advantages over Congress in conducting foreign policy because of the formal and informal powers of the presidency. (a) Identify two formal constitutional powers of the President in making foreign policy. (b) Identify two formal constitutional powers of Congress in making foreign policy. (c) Identify two informal powers of the President that contribute to the President’s advantage over Congress  in conducting foreign policy. (d) Explain how each of the informal powers identified in (c) contributes to the President’s advantage over Congress in conducting foreign policy. 2. Different interest groups will choose different techniques to achieve their objectives based on their resources, characteristics, and goals. (a) Describe each of the following techniques and explain why an interest group would choose each technique. • Litigation • Campaign contributions • Grassroots lobbying/ mass mobilization (b) Select one of the following groups and identify the primary technique it uses from the list in part (a).  Explain why the group you selected would employ that technique over the other two techniques. • American Medical Association (AMA) • Sierra Club • National Rifle Association (NRA) • National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 2 2004 AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS © 2000, The Washington Post Writers Group. Reprinted with permission. 3. Minor parties (third parties) have been a common feature of United States politics. (a) Describe the point of view expressed about minor parties in the political cartoon above. (b) Identify and explain how two rules of the United States electoral system act as obstacles to minor-party candidates winning elections. (c) Minor parties make important contributions to the United States political system in spite of the institutional obstacles to their candidates’ success. Describe two of these contributions. 4. Trust and confidence in government have declined in recent decades. (a) Explain how divided government has contributed to the decline in trust and confidence in government. Be sure to include a definition of divided government in your response. (b) Explain how the increased cost of election campaigns has contributed to the decline in trust and confidence in government. (c) Explain two specific consequences of the decline in trust and confidence in government for  individual political behavior. END OF EXAMINATION Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 3 