AP® United States Government and Politics 2010 Free-Response Questions The College Board The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the College Board is composed of more than 5,700 schools, colleges, universities and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves seven million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 3,800 colleges through major programs and services in college readiness, college admission, guidance, assessment, financial aid and enrollment. Among its widely recognized programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®), SpringBoard® and ACCUPLACER®. The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities and concerns. © 2010 The College Board. College Board, ACCUPLACER, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, SAT, SpringBoard and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. Admitted Class Evaluation Service is a trademark owned by the College Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Board and National Merit Scholarship Corporation. All other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.com. 2010 AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS  FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS SECTION II Time—1 hour and 40 minutes Directions:  You have 100 minutes to answer all four of the following questions. Unless the directions indicate otherwise, respond to all parts of all four questions. It is suggested that you take a few minutes to plan and outline each answer. Spend approximately one-fourth of your time (25 minutes) on each question. In your response, use substantive examples where appropriate. Make certain to number each of your answers as the question is numbered below. 1. Individuals often form groups in order to promote their interests. The Constitution contains several provisions that protect the rights of individuals who try to promote their interests in a representative democracy. (a) Explain two provisions in the Bill of Rights that protect individuals who try to influence politics. (b) Interest groups engage in a variety of activities to affect public policy. Explain how each of the following is used by interest groups to exert influence over policy. • Grassroots mobilization •Lobbying of government institutions • Litigation (c) Describe one specific federal governmental regulation of interest groups. 2. The federal bureaucracy as part of the executive branch exercises substantial independence in implementing governmental policies and programs. Most workers in the federal bureaucracy are civil-service employees who are organized under a merit system.  (a) Describe one key characteristic of the merit system. (b) For each of the following, describe one factor that contributes to bureaucratic independence. •The structure of the federal bureaucracy •The complexity of public policy problems (c) For each of the following, explain one Constitutional provision that it can use to check the bureaucracy. • Congress • The courts • Interest groups © 2010 The College Board.  Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -2-2010 AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS  FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS Source:  Web site of the clerk of the House of Representatives (http://clerk.house.gov/art_history/house_history/index.html) and the National Archives (http://www.archives.gov/federal-register/electoral-college/historical.html). States counted in this graphic are the eleven southern states of the former Confederacy (Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia). 3. Over the last several decades, the composition of the Democratic and Republican parties has changed in important ways. A major partisan shift has occurred in the South, but other demographic changes have also  been identified. Changes in party composition are reflected at different rates in presidential elections than  in congressional elections. (a) Identify one specific trend evident in the figure above. (b) Choose two of the following and use each to explain why southern voters from 1948 to 2000 were electing Democratic candidates to Congress more frequently than choosing Democratic candidates for the presidency. • Incumbency advantage • Gerrymandering •Differences between state and national parties (c) Several other changes in party composition have emerged in the past few decades. Select three of the following groups and for each explain how parties have changed in composition with respect to that  group. • Catholics • Labor union members • Women • Social conservatives © 2010 The College Board.  Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -3-2010 AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS  FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 4. The framers of the Constitution created a political system based on limited government. The original Constitution and the Bill of Rights were intended to restrict the powers of the national government.  Later constitutional developments also limited the powers of state governments.  (a) Explain how each of the following limits the powers of the national executive. • Federalism •Checks and balances (b) Explain how each of the following two provisions in the Bill of Rights limits the powers of the national government. • Establishment clause •Guarantee of a public trial (c) Choose one of the following and explain how it limits the power of state governments. •Citizenship clause of the Fourteenth Amendment • Selective incorporation STOP END OF EXAM © 2010 The College Board.  Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. -4-