A P College Board2019 AP® United States Government and PoliticsFree-Response Questions© 2019 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org. UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS SECTION II Time — 1 hour and 40 minutes Directions: You have 1 hour and 40 minutes to answer all four of the following questions. It is suggested that you spend approximately 20 minutes each on Questions 1, 2, and 3 and 40 minutes on Question 4. Unless directions indicate otherwise, respond to all parts of all four questions. In your response, use substantive examples where appropriate. It is recommended that you take a few minutes to plan each answer. You may plan your answers in this Questions booklet, but no credit will be given for notes written in this booklet. You will only earn credit for what you write in the Free Response booklet. 1.Since 2008 the Alliance Defending Freedom, a conservative Christian interest group, has promoted an annualevent known as Pulpit Freedom Sunday. On this occasion, pastors are encouraged to challenge a provision ofthe tax law known as the Johnson Amendment, which prohibits political activity by certain nonprofitorganizations, including religious organizations. While the Johnson Amendment does not restrict religiousleaders from speaking out regarding social issues, it does prohibit them from contributing money to politicalcampaigns or speaking out in favor or against candidates running for political office.On Pulpit Freedom Sunday, as an act of civil disobedience, pastors and religious leaders preach openly aboutthe moral qualifications of candidates seeking office.After reading the scenario, please respond to A, B, and C below. A.Describe an action Congress could take to address the concerns of the interest group in the scenario.B.In the context of the scenario, explain how partisan divisions could prevent the action described inpart A.C.Explain why the Alliance Defending Freedom might argue that their constitutional rights arethreatened by the Johnson Amendment.Begin your response to this question at the top of a new page in the Free Response booklet and fll in the appropriate circle indicating the question number. The figure presents a horizontal bar graph titled, Should Government Officials Compromise or Stick to Their Principles? Three bars of data are shown for the categories Democrat, Independents, and Republicans. A key indicates that two categories of data are represented: compromise and stick to principles. The bar graph lies above a number line with the values 0, 50 percent, and 100 percent.
The data represented by the 3 bars are as follows.
Democrats: 66 percent compromise and 34 percent stick to principles.
Independents: 57 percent compromise and 43 percent stick to principles.
Republican: 45 percent compromise and 55 percent stick to principles.
Source: American National Election Studies 2016 Pilot, January 2016 2.Use the bar graph to answer the following questions.A.Identify the political affiliation of people who are most likely to believe elected officials shouldcompromise.B.Describe the difference between Democrats and Republicans on their attitudes of whethergovernment officials should stick to their principles, based on the data in the bar graph.C.Explain how the data in the bar graph could influence how a Republican candidate would shift his orher campaign positions after securing the Republican nomination for president.D.Explain how the data in the bar graph could affect policy making interactions between the presidentand Congress.Begin your response to this question at the top of a new page in the Free Response booklet and fll in the appropriate circle indicating the question number. 3.This question requires you to compare a Supreme Court case you studied in class with one you have not studiedin class. A summary of the Supreme Court case you did not study in class is presented below and provides allof the information you need to know about this case to answer the prompt.In the 1950s, Pete Hernandez, a Mexican American agricultural worker, was found guilty of murder andsentenced to life in prison by an all-white jury in Jackson County, Texas. Hernandez’s defense claimed thatpeople of Mexican ancestry had been discriminated against in Jackson County. They pointed to the fact that noperson of Mexican ancestry had served on a jury in 25 years and that the Jackson County Courthouse itselfpracticed segregation in its facilities. The five jury commissioners, who selected the members of the grand jury,testified under oath that they selected jurors based only on their qualifications and did not consider race ornational origin in their decisions.In the ensuing case, Hernandez v. Texas (1954), the Supreme Court unanimously ruled in favor of Hernandez,deciding that evidence of discrimination against Mexican Americans existed in Jackson County and that theConstitution prohibits such discrimination.Based on the information above, respond to the following questions. A.Identify the clause in the Fourteenth Amendment that was used as the basis for the decision in bothBrown v. Board of Education (1954) and Hernandez v. Texas (1954).B.Explain how the facts in both Brown v. Board of Education and Hernandez v. Texas led to a similardecision in both cases.C.Explain how an interest group could use the decision in Hernandez v. Texas to advance its agenda.Begin your response to this question at the top of a new page in the Free Response booklet and fll in the appropriate circle indicating the question number. 4.The United States Constitution establishes a federal system of government. Under federalism, policy making isshared between national and state governments. Over time, the powers of the national government have increasedrelative to those of the state governments.Develop an argument about whether the expanded powers of the national government benefits or hinders policymaking.Use at least one piece of evidence from one of the following foundational documents:The Articles of Confederation Brutus 1 The Federalist 10 In your essay, you must: Articulate a defensible claim or thesis that responds to the prompt and establishes a line of reasoning. Support your claim or thesis with at least TWO pieces of accurate and relevant evidence. One piece of evidence must come from one of the foundational documents listed above. A second piece of evidence can come from any other foundational document not used as your first piece of evidence, or it may be from your knowledge of course concepts. Use reasoning to explain why your evidence supports your claim or thesis. Respond to an opposing or alternative perspective using refutation, concession, or rebuttal. Begin your response to this question at the top of a new page in the Free Response booklet and fll in the appropriate circle indicating the question number. STOP END OF EXAM 