AP® European History 2005 Free-Response Questions The College Board: Connecting Students to College Success The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 4,700 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves over three and a half million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. Copyright © 2005 by College Board. All rights reserved. College Board, AP Central, APCD, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Vertical Teams, Pre-AP, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board. Admitted Class Evaluation Service, CollegeEd, Connect to college success, MyRoad, SAT Professional Development, SAT Readiness Program, and Setting the Cornerstones are trademarks owned by the College Entrance Examination Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Entrance Examination Board and National Merit Scholarship Corporation. Other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: http://www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program and Pre-AP: apcentral.collegeboard.com. EUROPEAN HISTORY SECTION II Part A (Suggested writing time—45 minutes) Percent of Section II score—45 Directions: The following question is based on the accompanying Documents 1-12. (The documents have been edited for the purpose of this exercise.) Write your answer on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet. This question is designed to test your ability to work with and understand historical documents. Write an essay that: •Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with evidence from the documents. •Uses a majority of the documents. •Addresses all parts of the question. •Analyzes the documents by organizing them in as many appropriate ways as possible. Does not simply summarize the documents individually. •Takes into account both the sources of the documents and the authors’ points of view. You may refer to relevant historical information not mentioned in the documents. 1. Analyze various views regarding Western European unity from 1946 to 1989. Copyright © 2005 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 2 Historical Background: EUROPEAN UNION MEMBERSHIP, 1989 Copyright © 2005 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 3 Document 1 Source:  Sir Winston Churchill, former British Prime Minister, speech, University of Zurich, September 1946. We must build a kind of United States of Europe. The first step in the re-creation of the European Family must be a partnership between France and Germany. In this way only can France recover the moral and cultural leadership of Europe. There can be no revival of Europe without a spiritually great France and a spiritually great Germany. The structure of the United States of Europe, if well and truly built, will make the material strength of a single state less important. Small nations will count as much as large ones. And the first practical step would be to form a Council of Europe.  In all this urgent work, France and Germany must take the lead together.  Therefore I say to you:  let Europe arise! Document 2 Source:  Duncan Sandys, leader of the British European Movement, report to Winston Churchill on a conversation with Charles de Gaulle,* November 1946. De Gaulle said that the reference in Mr. Churchill’s Zurich Speech to a Franco-German partnership had been badly received in France. Germany, as a state, no longer existed. All Frenchmen were violently opposed to re-creating any kind of unified, centralized German state, and were gravely suspicious of the policy of the American and British governments. Unless steps were taken to prevent a revival of German power, there was a danger that a United Europe would become nothing else than an enlarged Germany. De Gaulle stressed that if French support for the idea of European Union was to be won, France must come in as a founding partner with Britain.  *President of France (1945-1946 and 1958-1969) Document 3 Source:  Andrei Vyshinsky, Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, speech to United Nations General Assembly, September 1947. It is becoming more and more evident to everyone that the implementation of the Marshall Plan* will place European countries under the economic and political control of the United States. Moreover, this plan is an attempt to split Europe into two camps and, with the help of the United Kingdom and France, to complete the formation of a bloc of several European countries hostile to the interests of the democratic countries of Eastern Europe and most particularly to the interests of the Soviet Union. An important feature of this plan is to make use of western Germany’s heavy industry as the basis for American expansion in Europe, in disregard of the national interests of the countries that suffered from German aggression. This policy is utterly incompatible with the fundamental principles of the United Nations. *The United States plan to aid the economic recovery of Europe (1947-1951) Copyright © 2005 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 4 Document 4 Copyright © 2005 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 5 Document 5 Source:  Robert Schuman, French Minister of Foreign Affairs, announcing the plan to establish a common market in coal and steel, May 1950. For peace really to have any chance, we first need a Europe. Five years almost to the day after the unconditional surrender of Germany, France is accomplishing the first decisive step in European construction and is inviting Germany to join in. This should completely transform conditions in Europe. Such a transformation makes possible further joint action, which until now has been impossible. Europe will be born out of all this, a Europe that is firmly united and solidly built. The coming together of the nations of Europe requires the elimination of the age-old opposition of France and Germany. Document 6 Source:  Konrad Adenauer, West German Chancellor, “The End of Nationalism,” in his book A World Indivisible, New York, 1955. As a result of the disaster that two world wars have brought to Germany, the great majority of our people have realized that nations cannot continue to live exclusively according to their own desires and inclinations. They must merge their interests with those of the other peoples of the world. There is no longer any important problem that is only a German or even only a European one. We must learn to think and to act in larger terms. The age of national states has come to an end. A new Europe will be built where our young people will once more lead active and peaceful lives. Document 7 Source:  Harold Macmillan, British finance minister, press statement, October 1956. Of course, the United Kingdom might stand outside the European Economic Community (EEC*) altogether—but that would at least involve a loss of advantage for our exports to European markets. At the other extreme we might join the EEC—but this would involve the collapse of our system of favoring trade within the British Commonwealth.** Obviously, if this were the only choice we could not hesitate. We must choose the Commonwealth. But can we find a way of associating with this initiative in Europe in such a way as to benefit us all? *An organization promoting economic integration among France, West Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg **A loose association of Great Britain and its former colonies Copyright © 2005 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 6 Document 8 Source:  Charles de Gaulle, President of France, press conference, May 1967. Compared with the motives that led “The Six” to organize their unit, we understand why Britain did not join the EEC. Britain is not continental and remains, because of the Commonwealth and because it is an island, committed far beyond the seas. It is tied to the United States by all kinds of special agreements. While this Community was taking shape, Britain first refused to participate and even took a hostile attitude, as if the EEC were an economic and political threat.  If Britain enters the Community without being really subjected to the agricultural rules, this will completely upset the equilibrium of the Common Market and remove for France one of the main reasons we can have for participating in it. Document 9 Source:  Willy Brandt, Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany), speech, Harvard University, June 1972. With his plan, George Marshall roused Europe’s stifled self-confidence. He gave many citizens of the old continent a concrete stimulus to bring down from the stars a vision of a Europe united in lasting peace. The Marshall Plan and the European Coal and Steel Community were the first steps of a European renaissance. Progressive thinkers in France, Italy, the Netherlands, Britain, and Germany were prepared for this change.  Document 10 Source:  Jack Lynch, Prime Minister of Irish Parliament, speech, parliamentary debate, December 1980. We have no traditional policy of neutrality in this country unlike countries such as Sweden, Switzerland, and Austria. I do not think that the word “neutrality” is relevant in the context of our membership in the EEC. Being members of the EEC, we would naturally be interested in the defense of the territories embraced by that community. There is no question of neutrality. Copyright © 2005 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 7 Document 11 Source:  Felipe González, Prime Minister of Spain, press statement, January 1983. NATO* is a vital step toward the consolidation of democracy. If Spain wishes to join the EEC, then it has to be part of the defense system of the West. NATO membership and joining the European Community mean the end of the traditional isolation of Spain. *North Atlantic Treaty Organization: Created in 1949 by the United States and Western European states as a collective security organization against communist expansion Document 12 Source:  Margaret Thatcher, British Prime Minister, speech on the Single European Act*, Bruges, Belgium, September 1988. To try to suppress nationhood and concentrate power at the center of a European union would be highly damaging and would jeopardize the objectives we seek to achieve.  Europe will be stronger precisely because it has France as France, Spain as Spain, Britain as Britain, each with its own customs, traditions, and identity. It would be folly to try to fit them into some sort of standardized European personality. Certainly we want to see Europe more united and with a greater sense of common purpose, but it must be in a way which preserves the different traditions, parliamentary powers, and sense of pride in one’s own country. *The 1986 plan to create a unified currency and integrate European markets fully  END OF PART A Copyright © 2005 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 8 EUROPEAN HISTORY SECTION II Part B (Suggested planning and writing time—35 minutes) Percent of Section II score—27 1/2 Directions:  You are to answer ONE question from the three questions below. Make your selection carefully, choosing the question that you are best prepared to answer thoroughly in the time permitted. You should spend 5 minutes organizing or outlining your answer. Write your answer to the question on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet, making sure to indicate the question you are answering by writing the appropriate question number at the top of each page. Write an essay that: •Has a relevant thesis. •Addresses all parts of the question. •Supports thesis with specific evidence. •Is well organized. 2. Analyze how economic and social developments affected women in England in the period from 1700 to 1850. 3. Using examples from at least two different states, analyze the key features of the “new monarchies” and the factors responsible for their rise in the period 1450 to 1550. 4. Compare and contrast the motives and actions of Martin Luther in the German states and King Henry VIII in England in bringing about religious change during the Reformation. Copyright © 2005 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 9 Part C (Suggested planning and writing time—35 minutes) Percent of Section II score—27 1/2 Directions:  You are to answer ONE question from the three questions below. Make your selection carefully, choosing the question that you are best prepared to answer thoroughly in the time permitted. You should spend 5 minutes organizing or outlining your answer. Write your answer to the question on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet, making sure to indicate the question you are answering by writing the appropriate question number at the top of each page. Write an essay that: •Has a relevant thesis. •Addresses all parts of the question. •Supports thesis with specific evidence. •Is well organized. 5. Historians speak of the rise of mass politics in the period from 1880 to 1914. Define this phenomenon and analyze its effects on European politics in this period. 6. Assess the extent to which the economic and political ideals of Karl Marx were realized in postrevolutionary Russia in the period from 1917 to 1939. 7. Analyze the economic, technological, and institutional factors responsible for western Europe’s domination of world trade from 1650 to 1800. END OF EXAM Copyright © 2005 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 10 