AP® European History 2006 Free-Response Questions Form B The College Board: Connecting Students to College Success The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 5,000 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves seven million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. College Board, AP Central, APCD, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Vertical Teams, Pre-AP, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. Admitted Class Evaluation Service, CollegeEd, connect to college success, MyRoad, SAT Professional Development, SAT Readiness Program, and Setting the Cornerstones are trademarks owned by the College Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Board and National Merit Scholarship Corporation. All other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.com. EUROPEAN HISTORY SECTION II Part A (Suggested writing time—45 minutes) Percent of Section II score—45 Directions:  The following question is based on the accompanying Documents 1-12. The documents have been edited for the purpose of this exercise. Write your answer on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet. This question is designed to test your ability to work with and understand historical documents. Write an essay that: • Provides an appropriate, explicitly stated thesis that directly addresses all parts of the question and does NOT simply restate the question. • Discusses a majority of the documents individually and specifically. • Demonstrates understanding of the basic meaning of a majority of the documents. • Supports the thesis with appropriate interpretations of a majority of the documents. • Analyzes the documents by explicitly grouping them in at least three appropriate ways.  • Takes into account both the sources of the documents and the authors’ points of view. You may refer to relevant historical information not mentioned in the documents. 1. Analyze the ways in which national and cultural identity in Alsace-Lorraine were perceived and promoted during the period from 1870 to 1919.   Historical Background: The region of Alsace and Lorraine was among the German territories of the Holy Roman Empire. Most of the region came under French control during the reign of Louis XIV (1643-1715). French rule ended when the region was ceded to Prussia on February 26, 1871. The Treaty of Frankfurt formally ended the Franco-Prussian War on May 10, 1871 and formalized the ceding of Alsace and Lorraine to the newly created German Empire. France regained the territory by the terms of the Treaty of Versailles (1919). © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. Document 1 Source: Otto von Bismarck, Prussian Prime Minister, conversation concerning possible territorial settlements, 1870. As you see, we are keeping Metz, but I confess I do not like that part of the arrangement. Strasbourg is German in speech, and will be so in heart ten years hence. Metz, however,  is French, and will be a hotbed of disaffection for a long time to come. Document 2 Source: Declaration to the French National Assembly, presented by the Alsatian deputies, February 17, 1871. We, the undersigned French citizens, bring to the National Assembly of France the expression of the unanimous will of the populations of Alsace and of Lorraine who solemnly claim their sacred and inalienable rights to the National Assembly of France as follows: I. Alsace and Lorraine do not consent to separation. Associated with France for more than two centuries in good fortune as in bad, these two provinces, ever exposed to the attacks of the enemy, have constantly sacrificed themselves in the cause of national greatness. They have sealed with their blood the indissoluble compact that binds them to French unity. These citizens signify to Germany and to the world the immutable will of Alsace and of Lorraine to remain French territory. II. France cannot agree to nor sign the cession of Lorraine and Alsace. III. Europe cannot permit nor ratify the abandonment of Alsace and Lorraine. Document 3 Source: German government proclamation concerning the conditions of the Treaty of Frankfurt, 1871. Alsace and German Lorraine were restored to the newly founded German Empire to which they belong. Because France tried for years to suppress the German language and German culture in Alsace, it becomes Germany's national duty to wean these people from the French. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 3 Document 4 Source: Professor Heinrich von Treitschke, German historian, What Do We Demand of France?, pamphlet, 1871. We Germans, who know Germany and France, know better what is good for Alsace than the unhappy people themselves, who through their French associations have lived in ignorance  of the new Germany. We will give them back their own identity against their will. We are astonished and glad to see the immortal working of the moral forces of history. Document 5 Source: Édouard Teutsch, Alsatian delegate, speech in the German Reichstag,  February 18, 1874. We speak on behalf of the people of Alsace-Lorraine on the subject of the change of nationality you have violently imposed upon them as a consequence of war. It is at the end of the nineteenth century, a century of enlightenment and progress, that Germany conquers us and exceeds her right as a civilized nation. Annexation without our consent is moral slavery. This people, one of the best in Europe, exalts the sentiment of right and justice. Now it was with your sword upon her throat that France, bleeding and exhausted, signed the treaty agreeing to abandon us. France yielded to violence, and our codes teach us that violence nullifies all contracts. Our hearts are irresistibly attracted to our French fatherland. Gentlemen, what are your prospects for the future? Instead of that era of peace and brotherhood among peoples that  it was in your power to inaugurate, we are sure that you foresee with the same dread as we, new wars, ruin and death again descending upon your homes. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 4 Document 6 Source: Statistics on the Linguistic Composition of Alsace-Lorraine, German government report, 1879. Dominant Language Spoken  Number of Communities  Percentage of District Population  LORRAINE  French  341  30.37  German  370  53.25  Neither  41  16.38  LOWER ALSACE  French  27  4.09  German  531  95.52  Neither  2  .39  UPPER ALSACE  French  17  3.71  German  324  78.71  Neither  43  17.58  TOTAL   French  385  12.12  German  1,225  77.39  Neither  86  10.49  Document 7 Source: Jacques Preiss, deputy from Colmar (Alsace), speech in the German Reichstag,  June 30, 1896. Assimilation, Germanization, has not taken a single step forward. It is terror that governs and poisons our political life. The government does not understand the people and the people do not understand the government. History will say:  The German Empire was able to conquer Alsace-Lorraine materially, but was not able to conquer it morally; the empire has not known how to win the heart and soul of the people. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 5 Document 8 Source: Heinrich Class, president of the nationalist Pan-German League, If I Were Kaiser, 1912. When we consider that in Alsace-Lorraine the number of French speakers has grown constantly since 1871, we need to speak out without sentimentality. We took this territory  out of military necessity. The inhabitants were an extra; the territory was the main thing.  Every adult must declare publicly and without reservation for himself and his family, that  the French language will be used neither in the home nor outside it and that no newspapers, periodicals, or books will be brought in from France. Whoever refuses this obligation has opted against the German Empire and must swiftly leave the country. Teaching in the public schools will be exclusively in German. The language of the state,  the courts, and the churches will be exclusively German. The constitution will be abolished. The territory will be placed under a minister for Alsace-Lorraine and ruled dictatorially. Document 9 Source: Newspaper article, Daily Observer, Berlin, August 5, 1915. The Alsatian women, on account of the instruction they had received, lacked close  attachment to the German nationality, language, literature, and history. They were, on the contrary, permeated by the French spirit, and have had such influence over their husbands  and children, that soon, within their families too, German culture was dominated and smothered by a Franco-Alsatian pseudo-culture. The love of our literature and of our history, the intelligent knowledge of the civilization and effort of our people, which the men had acquired in the schools and strengthened in the universities, did not resist the graces of the Alsatian women. These German virtues were blighted and dried up within the home, when they were not killed there. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 6 Document 10 © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. Document 11 Source: Oscar Ludman, First World War French army veteran, recollection of war’s end, in Alsace, Stepchild of the Rhine:  An Autobiography, 1931. My brother Ernest appeared with his sword and German medals. “I know where I belong— among the Germans. Even the oldest Alsatian families are packing, ready to ask pity from the Germans. Those who crave France, they have France now!” “Stop that,” my father warned, “. . . terrible things are going on. Germany treated us badly, and France isn’t starting any better. Nevertheless, I am Alsatian; here I have been raised and here I shall die. Stay here and see what it means to be an Alsatian. Learn to love the country and serve our unhappy people.” Document 12 Frère Médard, Alsatian priest, memoirs of his boyhood in pre-First World War Alsace, first published 1988. One can’t deny that certain students were impressed by this cult of the German Emperor.  This was reflected in their war games. A certain number of schoolboys were proud to wear  a helmet or German flags, and took pride in defeating poor French soldiers. One can’t help but laugh in the face of accusations, from our patriotic writers, that my young compatriots  at the time completely snubbed the Germans. How could they have done so when they  shared school, extracurricular activities, and leisure with their Prussian comrades, who either constituted a majority of the class or accounted for a sizeable proportion of it? My young compatriots wore, like the Prussians, and not without a certain pride, glowing German caps. Many of these high school students were invited to the homes of their Prussian friends. END OF PART A © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). EUROPEAN HISTORY SECTION II Part B (Suggested planning and writing time—35 minutes) Percent of Section II score—27 1/2 Directions: You are to answer ONE question from the three questions below. Make your selection carefully, choosing the question that you are best prepared to answer thoroughly in the time permitted. You should spend  5 minutes organizing or outlining your answer. Write your answer to the question on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet, making sure to indicate the question you are answering by writing the appropriate question number at the top of each page. Write an essay that: • Has a relevant thesis. • Addresses all parts of the question. • Supports thesis with specific evidence. • Is well organized. 2. How and to what extent did the Commercial Revolution transform the European economy and diplomatic balance of power in the period from 1650 to 1763 ? 3. Describe and analyze economic policies in Eastern and Western Europe after 1945. 4. Analyze anti-Semitism in Europe from the Dreyfus affair in the 1890’s to 1939. THIS SPACE MAY BE USED FOR PLANNING YOUR ANSWER. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. EUROPEAN HISTORY SECTION II Part C (Suggested planning and writing time—35 minutes) Percent of Section II score—27 1/2 Directions: You are to answer ONE question from the three questions below. Make your selection carefully, choosing the question that you are best prepared to answer thoroughly in the time permitted. You should spend 5 minutes organizing or outlining your answer. Write your answer to the question on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet, making sure to indicate the question you are answering by writing the appropriate question number at the top of each page. Write an essay that: • Has a relevant thesis. • Addresses all parts of the question. • Supports thesis with specific evidence. • Is well organized. 5. How and to what extent did the methods and ideals of Renaissance humanism contribute to the Protestant Reformation? 6. Analyze the intellectual foundations of religious toleration in eighteenth-century Europe. Question 7 appears on page 11. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. Erich Lessing/Art Resource, NY Courtesy of the Board of Trustees of the Victoria and Albert Museum/Art Resource, NY. Photograph by Joseph Paxton The Arch of Triumph, Paris, 1806-1836 The Crystal Palace, London, 1850-1851 7. Discuss how the two structures shown above reflect the societies and cultures that  produced them. THIS SPACE MAY BE USED FOR PLANNING YOUR ANSWER. STOP END OF EXAM © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 