AP® European History 2008 Free-Response Questions The College Board: Connecting Students to College Success The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 5,000 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves seven million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. © 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Board and National Merit Scholarship Corporation.  Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.com. EUROPEAN HISTORY SECTION II Part A (Suggested writing time—45 minutes) Percent of Section II score—45 Directions:  The following question is based on the accompanying Documents 1-12. The documents have been edited for the purpose of this exercise. Write your answer on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet. This question is designed to test your ability to work with and understand historical documents. Write an essay that: • Provides an appropriate, explicitly stated thesis that directly addresses all parts of the question and does NOT simply restate the question. • Discusses a majority of the documents individually and specifically. • Demonstrates understanding of the basic meaning of a majority of the documents. • Supports the thesis with appropriate interpretations of a majority of the documents. • Analyzes the documents by explicitly grouping them in at least three appropriate ways.  • Takes into account both the sources of the documents and the authors’ points of view. You may refer to relevant historical information not mentioned in the documents. 1. Analyze the causes of and the responses to the peasants’ revolts in the German states, 1524–1526. Historical Background: In late 1524, peasants, craftsmen, and poor soldiers formed bands and pillaged throughout a large area of the Holy Roman Empire. During the revolt, some of the rebel bands authored statements of grievances called Articles. Although most bands did not coordinate their activities, several groups met in Memmingen, Swabia, during March 1525 at a gathering known as the Peasant Parliament. After a series of battles, the authorities managed to suppress the revolts. More than 100,000 rebels and others were killed. © 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -2-© 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -3-Document 1 Source: Leonhard von Eck, Chancellor of Bavaria, report to Duke Ludwig of Bavaria, February 15, 1525. This rebellion has been undertaken to repress the princes and the nobility and has  its ultimate source in Lutheran teaching, for the peasants relate the majority of their demands to the Word of God, the Gospel, and brotherly love. The peasants are blinded, led astray, and made witless. If these peasants promised today that they would give their lords no further trouble, they could change their minds within an hour. Document 2 Source: Sebastian Lotzer, craftsperson and lay preacher, and Christoph Schappeler, preacher from Memmingen, Twelve Articles of the Swabian Peasants, March 1, 1525. We will not allow ourselves hereafter to be oppressed by our lords but will let them demand only what is just and proper according to the agreement between lords and peasants. Lords should no longer try to force more services or other dues from peasants without compensation. Peasants should, however, help lords when it is necessary and at proper times when it does not disadvantage the peasant and for a suitable compensation. Document 3 Source: Peasant Parliament of Swabia to the Memmingen Town Council, from Articles of the Peasants of Memmingen, March 3, 1525. Hitherto we have been held as your poor serfs, which is pitiable, given that Christ has purchased and redeemed us with His precious blood, just as He has the Emperor. But it is not our intention to reject all authority. We will be obedient to all authority appointed by God in all fair and reasonable matters, and we do not doubt that as Christian lords you will release us from serfdom. © 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -4-Document 4 Source: Reply of the Memmingen Town Council to the Articles of the Peasants of Memmingen, March 15, 1525. On the article concerning serfdom: we, your lords, purchased this right for a considerable sum of money, and the serfdom of a Christian is no hindrance to the salvation of his soul. However, so that you, the subjects, may see and recognize the council’s good will, the council will release and absolve its subjects from such serfdom that the council controls. In return the peasants shall pay us a reasonable amount of money. Document 5 Source: Pastor Johann Herolt, report of the events at Weinsburg, April 16, 1525. The peasants arrived so unexpectedly that the count and his subordinates could not return to the castle and had to remain in town with the citizens. The peasants scaled  the castle walls, captured the countess and her children, plundered the castle, and then appeared before the town. The townsfolk were peasant supporters. They opened the gates and towers to the peasants and let them in. Document 6 Source: Thomas Müntzer, preacher and theologian, open letter to the people of Allstedt, April 27, 1525. How long are you going to resist God’s will? The whole of Germany, France, and Italy are awake. Four abbeys were laid waste during Easter week. More peasants in the Black Forest have risen, 3,000 strong! Hammer away on the anvils of the princes and lords, cast down their towers to the ground! © 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -5-Document 7 Source: Martin Luther, theologian, Against the Murdering, Thieving Hordes of Peasants, Wittenberg, May 1525. The peasants forgot their place, violently took matters into their own hands, and are robbing and raging like mad dogs. It is clear that the assertions they made in their Twelve Articles were nothing but lies presented under the name of the Gospel. This is particularly the work of that devil, Thomas Müntzer, who rules at Mühlhausen. The peasants are not content with belonging to the devil themselves; they force and compel many good people to join their devilish league. Anyone who consorts with them goes to the devil with them and is guilty of all the evil deeds that they commit. Document 8 Source: Lorenz Fries, chief advisor to the Archbishop of Würzburg, secret report regarding a peasant assembly, June 1, 1525. The peasants occupying Würzburg were heard to say publicly that, since they were supposed to be brothers with one another, they believed the rich should share with  the poor, especially those rich persons who had acquired their property from trade  or had otherwise won it from the poor. The same was heard from many peasants in  the countryside, where many a prosperous man, who had hitherto observed and taken pleasure in the peasants’ uprising, began to scratch his head and to reflect on what a troublesome outcome the affair might have. Document 9 Source: Caspar Nützel, Nürnberg town councilor, letter to Duke Albert of Prussia, August 5, 1525. May God grant that the peace be preserved. It is indeed true that the poor, blind, and ignorant peasants have overstepped the mark with their unseemly behavior. No reasonable person could deny how unreasonably, unchristian, indeed, how excessively the authorities have torn out the hair of their subjects, whom they should aid, defend, and rule rather than fleece. © 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -6-Document 10 Source: Christoffel von Lichtenstein, nobleman, legal plea for leniency to Count Wilhelm von Henneberg, August 24, 1525. Many other nobles saved their lives and goods and joined the peasants because no help or consolation had been sent by the territorial prince. As an old man, I begged that the peasants should not force me to swear an oath of allegiance to them, in view of the fact that I had grown up with their parents, gone to school with them, and now in my old age had done them no harm, only good. That was to no avail. I had to swear the oath. Document 11 Source: Count Wilhelm von Henneberg, letter to Duke Albert of Prussia, February 2, 1526. At first the nobility looked on, unawares that misfortune was creeping up on us, for it pleased them well that the rebellion attacked the priests and the monks. Now, when the peasants had eaten all that was in the monasteries and drunk up and consumed all that was available, they fell upon the nobility’s houses, took all that they found in them, and burnt them down. Document 12 Source: Decree of the Imperial Diet* of Speyer, August 27, 1526. In the last year, terrible, unprecedented, and unchristian rebellion by subjects occurred through almost all parts of southern Germany. Therefore his Imperial Majesty expressly commanded that earnest examination be made so that such disturbance and rebellion be prevented in the future. The common man rather grievously forgot himself in the recent disturbance and acted violently against his authorities. In order that he might perceive that the grace and compassion of his superiors is greater and milder than his senseless deeds and actions, each authority shall have power to restore to their previous honorable estate those subjects who have surrendered unconditionally and been punished. *The formal assembly of imperial councilors and officials advising Emperor Charles V © 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -7-EUROPEAN HISTORY SECTION II Part B (Suggested planning and writing time—35 minutes) Percent of Section II score—27 1/2 Directions: You are to answer ONE question from the three questions below. Make your selection carefully,  choosing the question that you are best prepared to answer thoroughly in the time permitted. You should spend  5 minutes organizing or outlining your answer. Write your answer to the question on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet, making sure to indicate the question you are answering by writing the appropriate question number at the top of each page. Write an essay that: • Has a relevant thesis. • Addresses all parts of the question. • Supports thesis with specific evidence. • Is well organized. 2. Analyze the methods and degrees of success of Russian political and social reform from the period of Peter the Great (1689–1725) through Catherine the Great (1762–1796). 3. Describe and analyze the changes that led to Europe’s rapid population growth in the eighteenth century. 4. Analyze the economic and social challenges faced by Western Europe in the period from 1945 to 1989. © 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -8-EUROPEAN HISTORY SECTION II Part C (Suggested planning and writing time—35 minutes) Percent of Section II score—27 1/2 Directions: You are to answer ONE question from the three questions below. Make your selection carefully, choosing the question that you are best prepared to answer thoroughly in the time permitted. You should spend 5 minutes organizing or outlining your answer. Write your answer to the question on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet, making sure to indicate the question you are answering by writing the appropriate question number at the top of each page. Write an essay that: • Has a relevant thesis. • Addresses all parts of the question. • Supports thesis with specific evidence. • Is well organized. 5. European women’s lives changed in the course of the nineteenth century politically, economically, and socially. Identify and explain the reasons for those changes. 6. Analyze the major factors responsible for the rise of anti-Semitism in nineteenth-century Europe. 7. Analyze the ways in which the events of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic period (1789–1815) led people to challenge Enlightenment views of society, politics, and human nature. STOP END OF EXAM © 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). -9-