AP® United States History 2003 Scoring Guidelines Form B The materials included in these files are intended for use by AP teachers  for course and exam preparation; permission for any other use must be  sought from the Advanced Placement Program®. Teachers may reproduce them, in whole or in part, in limited quantities for noncommercial, face-to-face teaching purposes. This permission does not apply to any third-party copyrights contained herein. This material may not be mass distributed, electronically or otherwise.  These materials and any copies made of them may not be resold, and the  copyright notices must be retained as they appear here. These materials were produced by Educational Testing Service® (ETS®), which develops and administers the examinations of the Advanced Placement  Program for the College Board. The College Board and Educational Testing Service (ETS) are dedicated to the principle of equal opportunity, and their  programs, services, and employment policies are guided by that principle. The College Board is a national nonprofit membership association whose mission is to prepare, inspire, and connect students to college and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 4,300 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves over three million students and their parents, 22,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the  PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of equity and  excellence, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. For further information, visit www.collegeboard.com Copyright © 2003 College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Vertical Teams, APCD, Pacesetter, Pre-AP, SAT, Student Search Service, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board. AP Central is a trademark owned by the College Entrance Examination Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark jointly owned by the College Entrance Examination Board and the National Merit Scholarship Corporation. Educational Testing Service and ETS are registered trademarks of Educational Testing Service. Other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. For the College Board’s online home for AP professionals, visit AP Central at apcentral.collegeboard.com. Evaluate the effectiveness of Progressive Era reformers and the federal government in bringing about reform at the national level. In your answer be sure to analyze the successes and limitations of these efforts in the period 1900-1920. The 8-9 Essay •Contains a clear, well-developed thesis that evaluates the successes and limitations of Progressive reform between 1900 and 1920. •Presents an effective analysis of several factors that contributed to the level of success achieved •Effectively uses a substantial number of documents •Supports thesis with substantial and relevant outside information •May contain minor errors. •Is well organized and well written. The 5-7 Essay •Contains a thesis that addresses the successes and limitations of Progressive reform between 1900 and 1920. •Has some analysis of one or two factors OR examines several factors in a general manner. •Uses a number of documents effectively. •Supports thesis with some outside information. •May contain errors that do not seriously detract from the quality of the essay. •Has acceptable organization and writing. The 2-4 Essay •Contains a limited, confused, and/or poorly developed thesis. •Deals with the question in a general manner; simplistic or overstated analysis. •Quotes or briefly cites some documents. •Contains little relevant outside information. •May contain major errors. •May be poorly organized and/or written The 0-1 Essay •Lacks a thesis or simply restates the question. •Demonstrates an incompetent or inappropriate response. •Has little or no understanding of the documents or ignores them completely. •Is poorly organized and/or written. •Contains substantial factual errors The --- Essay •Is completely off-topic or blank DOCUMENT INFORMATION AND INFERENCES DBQ Document A: 1907 Washington Post cartoon Document Information: •Teddy Roosevelt attacks Bad Trusts •TR restrains the Good Trusts •TR destroys Bad Trusts Document Inferences: •Reformers can distinguish between good and bad trusts •One role of federal government is to police corporations •Good trusts are not a fundamental threat to society •To secure the public good, government must be more powerful than private corporations Document B: Neill-Reynolds Report, 1906 Document Information: •Report documented awful conditions in meat-packing •Some workers are ill with tuberculosis •Workers are ignorant of relationship between cleanliness and disease Document Inferences: •Few effective regulations covered meat-packing industry •Industrial working conditions were poor •Buildings not designed with good working conditions in mind Document C: Jane Addams, 1909 Document Information: •Thousands of children worked in factories •Educators acted as though industrial work does not harm children Document Inferences: •State laws on child labor were inadequate •Many children spent only a short time in school •Education should address actual needs created by the social-economic system. Document D: Speech by Roosevelt, 1912 Document Information: •Need for political reform •Need direct presidential primaries •Need direct election of US senators •Electoral college not adequately democratic DOCUMENT INFORMATION AND INFERENCES DBQ (continued) Document Inferences: •TR making a stump speech •US Senate was an exclusive, undemocratic club •Eventual passage of the 17th Amendment Document E: Clayton Antitrust Act, 1914 Document Information: •Price discrimination is unlawful when it lessens competition •Labor is not a commodity, hence antitrust laws do not apply to labor organizations •Monopolies in business are unacceptable and now illegal Document Inferences: •Before this, labor was subject to antitrust laws •Clayton Act is part of President Wilson’s New Freedoms •Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890 was strengthened •Labor organizations have gained influence Document F: Herbert Croly, New Republic, 1914 Document Information: •President Wilson claims too much for what he has accomplished •President Wilson has had successes but they are inadequate compared the reforms needed Document Inferences: •Discontent with Wilson’s New Freedom •Need for greater change, perhaps more systemic Document G: Hammer v. Dagenhart, 1918 Document Information: •Can oppose federal child labor laws •Child labor is a local/state matter Document Inferences: •State rights should not be undercut •Supreme Court does not reflect Progressive reform •Some parents want their children to work in factories and mills Document H: National Archives Photograph, 1918 Document Information: •Women don’t have the vote and they want it •President Wilson sympathized with Germans who don’t enjoy self-government, but not with American women who cannot vote •President Wilson is like the German Kaiser Document Inferences: •Progressive reforms haven’t covered women adequately •Context is war for democracy abroad and New York’s passage of woman suffrage •Women want to be able to vote in all elections Document I: W.E.B. DuBois, The Crisis, 1919 Document Information: •Black men are drafted to fight abroad but remain oppressed at home •Southern oligarchy runs Washington, DC on issues of race •U.S. falls far short of its ideals because of its oppression of Black people Document Inferences: •Progressive reform has failed in advancing civil rights of black Americans •Distance between rhetoric of war and reality at home •Racial segregation deepened in Washington during Wilson’s administration Document J: Bar Graph of Eligible Voters Who Cast Ballots In Presidential Elections Document Information: •Decline in percentage of eligible voters who voted 1900-1920 •Sharp decline in presidential voting between 1916 and 1920 •Percentage of eligible voters who voted quite stable between 1904 and 1916 Document Inferences: •19th Amendment may be less significant than proponents suggested •Or, it may be that many eligible women voters did not bother to vote DOCUMENT INFORMATION AND INFERENCES DBQ (continued) Outside Information for DBQ Trust-busting Northern Securities Case 1904 Sherman Antitrust Act 1890 New Nationalism of Roosevelt New Freedom of Wilson Standard Oil Decision (1911) Hepburn Act --- Reclamation Act 1902 Federal Reserve Act 1913 Adamson Act 1916 Federal Trade Commission Gifford-Pinchot Pure Food and Drug Act 1906 Food and Drug Administration Meat Inspection Act 1906 Upton Sinclair The Jungle Lewis Hine Triangle Shirtwaist Fire President appointed Neill-Reynolds Investigation Lillian Wald Hull House Roosevelt’s response to The Jungle Keating-Owen Act 1916 Settlement Houses John Dewey and Progressive education ideas National Child Labor Committee Progressive Party of 1912 17th Amendment David G. Phillips, Treason of the Senate Muckrakers Danbury Hatters’ Case (1908) 19th Amendment Women’s Peace Party 1915 Carrie Chapman Catt and National American Woman Suffrage Association Alice Paul and National Women’s Party Segregation deepened in Wilson’s administration Bloody Summer of 1919 Increased lynchings New Republic—liberal journal associated with Roosevelt Birth of a Nation Rebirth of the Ku Klux Klan Formation of NAACP Ida B. Wells and failure of anti-lynching campaign The Crisis, NAACP journal Decline of Political Machines Elitist Progressive discouragement of immigrant voting Political activity found expression in other outlets Compare the ways in which TWO of the following reflected tensions in colonial society: Bacon’s Rebellion (1676), Pueblo Revolt (1680), Salem Witchcraft trials (1692), Stono Rebellion (1739). The 8-9 Essay •Has a well-developed thesis that discusses two of the events in a manner that indicates a good understanding of each event and how it reflected colonial tensions. •Supports the thesis with substantial relevant information. •Has effective analysis of the connection between the events and social tensions  •Shows good balance in treatment of the two events •Supports thesis with substantial and relevant outside information •May contain minor errors. •Well-organized and well written The 5-7 Essay •Discusses two of the events in a manner that indicates an understanding of the event and how it reflected colonial tensions •Supports thesis with some relevant information •May have limited analysis of the connection between the events and social tensions •May have some imbalance in the treatment of the two events •Has acceptable organization and writing •May contain errors that do not seriously detract from the quality of the essay. The 2-4 Essay •Has a limited or unfocused thesis that presents a superficial discussion of the events with little understanding of the underlying tensions •Supports the thesis with few relevant facts •Contains little or no analysis •Shows significant imbalance in the treatment of the two events •May contain major errors •May be poorly organized and/or written The 0-1 Essay •Lacks a thesis or simply restates the question. •Demonstrates an incompetent or inappropriate response. •Contains substantial factual errors. •Is poorly organized and/or written. The --- Essay •Is completely off-topic or blank  Bacon’s Rebellion (1676) (land and white/red opposition) • Bacon and young planters opposed Indian policy of Virginia Governor Berkeley • land hunger of recent arrivals for tobacco acreage • differences between young and established planters • differences Virginians had with Berkeley over taxes, governor’s powers, extension of voting rights • Whites versus Indians (Bacon wanted to “ruine and extirpate all Indians”) • social conflicts fueled by land hunger, falling tobacco prices, rising taxes and lack of opportunity Pueblo Revolt (1680)   (cultural, economic, religious conflict) • religious conflict between Franciscan friars and Pueblo peoples • friars and other Spanish colonists placed heavy demands on Indians: tribute, forced labor, and religious conversion • Popé, an Indian shaman, led uprising against the Spanish , killing more than 400 • cultural assimilation failed; Spain reestablished control, but stressed cooperation Salem Witchcraft trials  (1692) (generational, economic and political conflict) • generational conflict between adolescent girls and older women • generational conflict between Puritan colonists and younger families • old family animosities • pressures of population and land availability increase tension • tensions between Salem Village and Salem Towne • political tension/fear over absence of governor and new royal charter Stono Rebellion  (1739) (racial conflict) • South Carolina slaves near the Stono River seized guns and ammunition from a store, killing storekeepers and nearby planters • militia put down the rebellion, killing dozens  • slaves vs. masters • laws governing slaves were stiffened Although the power of the national government increased during the early republic, this development often faced serious opposition. Compare the motives and effectiveness of those opposed to the growing power of the national government in TWO of the following: Whiskey Rebellion (1794), Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions (1798-1799), Hartford Convention (18141815), Nullification Crisis (1832-1833). The 8-9 Essay •Contains a clear, well-developed thesis that compares and evaluates the motives and effectiveness of two groups opposed to the growing power of the federal government •Supports the thesis with substantial relevant information •Shows an understanding of the role of the federal government in these events •Contains a reasonably balanced treatment of both events •May contain minor errors •Is well-organized and well written. The 5-7 Essay •Has a thesis that compares and evaluates the motives and effectiveness of two groups opposed to the growing power of government •Supports the thesis with some information •Aware the federal government played a role in these events •May be imbalanced in the treatment of the two events •Has acceptable organization  •May contain errors that do not seriously detract from the quality of the essay. The 2-4 Essay •Has a poorly developed or has no thesis, may fail to make an effective comparison of  two groups •Provides few relevant facts •Shows little or no understanding of role of federal government •May have major imbalance in treatment of the two groups •May contain major errors that detract from the essay •May be poorly organized and/or written The 0-1 Essay •Lacks a thesis or simply restates the question. •Demonstrates an incompetent or inappropriate response. •Contains substantial factual errors. •Is poorly organized and/or written. The --- Essay •Is completely off-topic or blank  Whiskey Rebellion (1794) • arose in opposition to Federalist-dominated Congress • farmers sense they are controlled by eastern interests (conflict between coastal and backcountry regions) • farmers charged that PA govt. which had protected them inadequately now were taxing them disproportionately • rebellion failed and the authority of the national government was strengthened Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions (1798-99) • arose in opposition to Federalist-dominated Congress • opposition to Alien and Sedition Acts • Virginia and Kentucky assemblies declared that national govt. violated Bill of Rights • Resolutions also declared that states have right to judge whether central govt. threatens peoples’ liberties • Resolutions said Alien and Sedition acts were null and void • Resolutions received little support from other regions • Resolutions were quite influential; rallied Republican opinion elsewhere; provided precedent for alter states’ rights advocates Hartford Convention (1814-5) • Arose out of stalemate in the war of 1812 • Federalists began threatening to secede as war continued between U.S. and Britain • delegates from five New England states met at Hartford to discuss possible secession • condemned the war, proposed constitutional amendments to limit federal government powers • helped lead to dissolution of Federalist party Nullification Crisis (1832-1833) • conflict surfaced again about division of sovereignty between state and central governments • southern leaders feared growth of federal power and feared abolitionist sentiment in the North and feared the continuation of of high tariff policies • John C. Calhoun expanded on the idea of nullification expressed in Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions—that the states have the right to judge the constitutionality of federal actions • Heated conflict results in Compromise tariff of 1833, with both sides claiming victory Analyze the ways in which farmers and industrial workers responded to industrialization in the Gilded Age (1865-1900). The 8-9 Essay •Contains a clear, well-developed analysis of the response of farmers and industrial workers to industrialization •Discusses several ways these two groups responded •Substantial relevant supporting information about responses to industrialization •Shows good balance in treatment of the two groups •May contain minor errors that do not detract from the overall quality of the essay. •Is well-organized and well-written The 5-7 Essay •Contains some analysis of the response of farmers and industrial workers to industrialization •Supports the analysis with some supporting information about responses to industrialization •Discusses a few ways these two groups responded •May have some imbalance in treatment of the two groups •May contain errors that do not seriously detract from the quality of the essay. •Has acceptable organization and writing The 2-4 Essay •Little or no analysis of the response of farmers and industrial workers to industrialization •Discusses only one type of response •Little or no relevant supporting evidence •May have major imbalance  •May contain major errors •May be poorly organized and/or written The 0-1 Essay •Lacks a thesis or simply restates the question. •Demonstrates an incompetent or inappropriate response. •Contains substantial factual errors. •Is poorly organized and/or written. The --- Essay •Completely off-topic or the booklet is blank  Farmers • extended cash-crop farming westward • adopted mechanization to improve productivity • formed cooperation with the Grange movement (most failed) • pressured states to pass Granger laws • supported Interstate Commerce Act (1887) • Munn v. Illlinois • defended silver currency • founded National Alliance in 1880’s • Populism (1890’s): Free Silver; Omaha Platform (1892) • challenged the two-party system Industrial Workers • formed union organizations: National Labor Union (1866); Knights of labor (1869); American Federation of Labor (1886) • strikes: Molly McGuires (1876); Great Railroad Strike (1877); Haymarket Riot (1886); Homestead (1892); Pullman Strike (1894) • left skilled wok for unskilled work • children sent into mills and factories to increase family incom • women entered paid labor force in increasing numbers • boycotts (e.g. Pullman workers) Describe and account for changes in the American presidency between 1960 and 1975 as symbolized by Kennedy’s Camelot, Johnson’s Great Society and Nixon’s Watergate.  In your answer address the power of the presidency and the role of the media. The 8-9 Essay •Describes, analyzes and accounts for changes in the presidency and role of the media •Supports the analysis with substantial relevant information •Discusses all three presidential administrations with good balance •May contain minor errors •Is well organized and well written The 5-7 Essay •Describes with some accuracy the changes in power of the presidency and role of media with a few examples •Supports the discussion with some relevant information •Discusses all three presidential administrations, but may have imbalance •May contain errors that do not seriously detract from the quality of the essay •May be well organized and/or well-written The 2-4 Essay •Describes only one: either power of the presidency or role of media and does so superficially •Provides little or no specific supporting information •Describes the three presidential administrations superficially or fails to discuss one or two of them •May contain major errors •May be poorly organized/and or written The 0-1 Essay •Lacks a thesis or simply restates the question •Demonstrates an incompetent or inappropriate response •Is poorly organized and poorly written •May contain substantial factual errors The --- Essay •Is completely off-topic or blank Kennedy: Power of presidency, generally increased under JFK, because of • Cold War need for strong presidential leadership against the Soviet threat (Castro in Cuba, Cuban missile crisis, meetings with Khrushchev, involvement in Vietnam) • increased size of federal government (due to prior developments and to JFK’s New Frontier programs) • Democratic control of legislative and executive branches of federal government Role of the media: The media generally strengthened JFK’s presidency • JFK and advisors used the media, in particular television, very effectively to convey an image of the president as youthful, athletic and glamorous (this begins in the election of 1960) • images of president’s wife and young son also conveyed a youthful vigorous image • Assassination of JFK and the extensive coverage of it cemented the Kennedy legend Johnson Power of presidency reached something of a high point under LBJ but then began to decline • LBJ, a former Senate leader, was very effective at getting his legislative agenda through Congress • Cold War challenges continued to make a strong president necessary • However, many of LBJ’s policies (support for civil rights, anti-poverty programs, increasing involvement in Vietnam) provoked strong opposition from different groups Role of the media: LBJ was generally less able to manage his media image • LBJ was less telegenic than JFK, not seen as young and glamorous • “credibility gap” developed between the administrations optimistic accounts of Vietnam and the images of war seen by Americans every night • riots and domestic disturbances, also heavily covered by TV and other media seemed to show that LBJ was increasingly out of touch and no longer in control of events Nixon Power of presidency, Despite his efforts to create an “imperial presidency,” Nixon’s administration saw an overall decline in the power of the presidency  • opposition party in control of Congress makes it hard for Nixon to pass his legislative agenda • slow to disengage from Vietnam, costing him support • used executive actions to fight his enemies, both foreign and domestic • revelations of illegal actions taken to insure his re-election in 1972 and a cover-up of them (Watergate scandal) eventually led to his resignation  • power of Congress to oversee president increased as a result of post-Watergate legislation Role of media: The media and the Nixon White House became increasingly hostile, weakening the president’s effectiveness • Nixon had some success appealing to the “silent majority” • war in Vietnam and domestic protests continued to be covered heavily (invasion of Cambodia, Kent State shootings), largely unfavorable for Nixon • Watergate scandal put Nixon on the defensive, made him see much of the media as another enemy Outside Information Green Berets 1960 TV debates Gerald Ford Assassination coverage RFK Vietnam War Draft/draft protests Domestic riots Hawks and Doves Walter Cronkite Gulf of Tonkin My Lai Massacre Kent State shootings Sam Erwin John Erlichman John Dean Earl Butts Henry Kissinger China trip Fall of Saigon Jacqueline Kennedy/John-John Space Race “I am not a crook” “Silent Majority” SALT “dirty tricks” 1965 Civil Rights Act Cuban Missile Crisis Peace Corps Bay of Pigs Pentagon papers Berlin Wall (“Ich bin ein Berliner”) War on Poverty Medicare “Plumbers” CRP George McGovern Voting Rights Act Twenty-fourth Amendmant Marilyn Monroe Deep Throat 