        AP® United States Government and Politics  2010 Scoring Guidelines                    The College Board  The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the College Board is composed of more than 5,700 schools, colleges, universities and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves seven million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 3,800 colleges through major programs and services in college readiness, college admission, guidance, assessment, financial aid and enrollment. Among its widely recognized programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®), SpringBoard® and ACCUPLACER®. The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities and concerns.   © 2010 The College Board. College Board, ACCUPLACER, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, SAT, SpringBoard and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. Admitted Class Evaluation Service is a trademark owned by the College Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Board and National Merit Scholarship Corporation. All other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html.  Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.com.  Question 1  6 points  Part (a): 2 points   One point is earned for each of two provisions of the Bill of Rights identified. Each provision must be identified and include a discussion of what the provision protects.  Answers may include, but are not limited to:  • Speech — allows citizens to say almost anything they want • Press — allows citizens access to information, each other and policymakers; printed advocacy • Assembly — allows citizens to come together • Petition — allows citizens to address government • Various due process/criminal justice provisions (e.g., grand jury indictment, jury of peers, search and seizure) — protects citizens from retribution/harassment from government  Part (b): 3 points   One point is earned for each of three explanations. The explanations must include a description of the interest group activity and how that activity may influence the action of a governmental body, official or policy.  • Grassroots mobilization — interest groups organize citizens, who act to influence policymakers • Lobbying — direct contact with policymakers for the purpose of persuasion through the provision of information, political benefits, etc. • Litigation — the use of courts to gain policy preferences through cases or amicus curiae   Part (c): 1 point   One point is earned for describing a regulation. The regulation does not need to be identified by its formal title.  • Disclosure of contributions, funding or activities • Registration of lobbyists, PACs • Campaign finance laws • Limits on gifts • Limits on revolving-door appointments • Limits on honoraria • Prohibition of bribery • Any named law or regulation with a description of what it does to regulate interest groups  A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is attempted but earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is assigned to an answer that is blank or off task.  Question 2  6 points  Part (a): 1 point   One point is earned for a description of a characteristic of the merit system. Answers may include:  • Hiring or promotion based on merit/experience/qualifications • Hiring based on testing  Part (b): 2 points  One point is earned for each of two descriptions of factors contributing to bureaucratic independence. Answers may include:  • Structure of the bureaucracy  Large  Specialized units/expertise  Tenure protections/hard to fire  Based on merit  Independent agencies/independent regulatory commissions  • Complexity of public policy problems  Specialized units/expertise   Delegated authority — because Congress and the president cannot handle everything, they delegate authority to the bureaucracy  Discretionary authority — because legislation lacks details, the bureaucracy can fill in the gaps  Part (c): 3 points  One point is earned for each of three explanations of a constitutional provision that can check the bureaucracy. Answers may include:  • Congress  Appropriations — can reward or punish agency  Legislation — can pass legislation affecting the bureaucracy  Rejection of presidential appointments to the bureaucracy  Impeachment of executive officials  • Courts   Court rulings that limit bureaucratic practices   Judicial review — can declare bureaucratic actions unconstitutional  Injunctions against federal agencies Question 2 (continued)  • Interest groups  Use of the First Amendment  Lobbying  Protests  Media usage  Speech  Litigation  A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is attempted but earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is assigned to an answer that is blank or off task.  Question 3  6 points  Part (a): 1 point  One point is earned for identifying one specific trend evident in the figure:  • Percentage of House seats for Democrats has trended down. • Percentage of presidential electoral votes for Democrats has trended down.  Part (b): 2 points  One point is earned for each explanation of why, from 1948 to 2000, Southern voters elected Democratic candidates to Congress more frequently than they elected Democratic candidates to the presidency:    • Incumbency advantage — Even though Southern voters were voting for Republican presidential candidates, they continued to vote for incumbent Democratic congressional candidates because of the incumbency advantage. • Gerrymandering — District lines created safe seats/majority–minority districts, which protected Democratic seats even though there were more Republican voters in statewide presidential elections. • State versus national parties — Because national and state parties were largely independent of each other, to get votes Democratic congressional candidates responded to local interests, whereas Democratic presidential candidates responded to a national constituency.  Part (c): 3 points  One point is earned for each explanation of how, over the past few decades, party composition has changed with respect to three of the four groups:  • Catholics — They have become less reliable Democratic voters. • Labor union members — They have become less reliable Democratic voters; have decreased in number and thus there are fewer Democratic supporters; have become a smaller percentage of the Democratic voting bloc. • Women — They have become more reliable Democratic voters; have increased in number and thus there are more Democratic supporters; have become a larger percentage of the Democratic voting bloc. • Social conservatives — They were previously nonexistent and have now crystallized to become more reliable Republican voters; previously found in the Democratic party and have moved to the Republican party.  A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is attempted but earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is assigned to an answer that is blank or off task.  Question 4  5 points  Part (a): 2 points   One point is earned for each explanation of how each of the following limits the powers of the national executive.  • Federalism — divides power between national and state governments, which limits the authority of the national executive. • Checks and balances — the response must explain how other branches of government can check (limit, restrict) what the executive can do. A correct example of a check or balance on the national executive is acceptable to earn this point.  Part (b): 2 points  One point is earned for each explanation of how each of the following limits the powers of the national government.  • Establishment Clause — prevents the national government from establishing a national religion or taking any action that would show preferential treatment for one religion over another. • Guarantee of a public trial — requiring trials to be open to the public limits the government’s ability to violate the rights of citizens.   Part (c): 1 point  One point is earned for an explanation of how one of the following limits the power of state governments.  • Citizenship Clause — provides a national definition of citizenship that states cannot violate; requires states to provide citizenship guarantees to all who meet the definition of citizen. • Selective incorporation — prohibits states from denying Bill of Rights provisions regarding freedom of expression, rights of the accused or privacy.  A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is attempted but earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is assigned to an answer that is blank or off task.  