AP® United States Government and Politics 2012 Scoring Guidelines The College Board The College Board is a mission-driven not-for-profit organization that connects students to college success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the College Board was created to expand access to higher education. Today, the membership association is made up of more than 5,900 of the world’s leading educational institutions and is dedicated to promoting excellence and equity in education. Each year, the College Board helps more than seven million students prepare for a successful transition to college through programs and services in college readiness and college success — including the SAT® and the Advanced Placement Program®. The organization also serves the education community through research and advocacy on behalf of students, educators, and schools. The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. © 2012 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, SAT and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. All other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org. AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS 2012 SCORING GUIDELINES  Question 1 5 points Part (a): 3 points Describe the role of each of the following in lawmaking (3 points total, 1 point per role): • Senate filibuster allows a senator on the floor to: o Prevent/delay action on a particular bill. o Prevent/delay other business from being conducted. • Rules Committee schedules or manages the flow of legislation on the floor to: o Make it easier or more difficult for a bill to pass. o Make the process more efficient/orderly/manageable. • Conference Committee reconciles differences in House and Senate versions of a bill. Must describe the role in lawmaking explicitly. Part (b): 1 point Describe one method by which Congress exercises oversight of the federal bureaucracy (1 point): • Budgetary process (power of the purse) • Committee hearings • Confirmation or rejection of political appointments to the bureaucracy • Investigations • New legislation • Legislative veto Must describe the context in which Congress uses the method to oversee the bureaucracy. Part (c): 1 point Explain how casework affects members’ attention to legislation (1 point): • Diverts time, resources, and staff, thus reducing members’ ability to focus on legislation. • Develops awareness of problems, thus focusing more time and resources on related legislation. A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is completely off task or is on task but earns no points. A score of dash (—) is assigned to an answer that is blank. AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS 2012 SCORING GUIDELINES  Question 2 5 points Part (a): 1 point One point is earned for demonstrating an increase in minority representation between 1960 and 2010.  Part (b): 2 points One point is earned for an explanation of how the Voting Rights Act of 1965 assisted in the removal of barriers to minority voting: • Eliminating voter registration requirements (e.g., literacy tests, residency requirements) that prevented minorities from voting led to increased access for minority voters.   • Creating federal oversight of elections helped eliminate discriminatory mechanisms (e.g., voter intimidation, ballot fraud) that were used to prevent minority voters from voting, which led to increased access for minority voters.  • Eliminating the use of English-only ballots that prevented non-English-speaking minorities from voting led to increased access for minority voters.   A second point is earned for an explanation of how the Twenty-fourth Amendment assisted in the removal of barriers to minority voting: Eliminating poll taxes that limited voting by lower-income people led to an increase in minority voting because minorities are often overrepresented among poor people. Part (c): 2 points One point is earned for identifying one barrier that currently impedes minority representation in Congress. The barrier may affect either minority candidates running for Congress or minority voters attempting to vote for minority candidates. Minority Candidates  Minority Voters  • Incumbency advantage • Gerrymandered districts • Majority-minority districts • Prejudice, racism, sexism • Electoral resources • Electoral qualifications • Single-member districts/winner-take-all  • I.D. requirements • English-only ballots • Felony disenfranchisement • Purging voter rolls • Voter intimidation  A second point is earned for explaining how the barrier identified above inhibits minority representation in Congress: • A minority candidate barrier must explain how the barrier identified above limits minority representation.  • A minority voter barrier must explain how the barrier limits minority participation and how that directly affects minority representation in Congress.   A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is completely off task or is on task but earns no points. A score of dash (—) is assigned to an answer that is blank. AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS 2012 SCORING GUIDELINES  Question 3 8 points Part (a): 2 points One point is earned for each of two descriptions of political factors that affect presidential appointment decisions. Acceptable descriptions include: campaign promises gender geographic diversity home-state senator (if lower courts) ideology interest group input issue positions Part (b): 4 points party potential for confirmation success professional background, experience, education race religion scandal One point is earned for each of two identifications of political factors that affect the confirmation process for presidential nominees. One point is earned for each of two explanations for how the political factor complicates the confirmation of judicial appointees.   Acceptable factors include:  advice and consent  the media (televising Judiciary Committee  campaign promises  hearings)  filibuster  party  gender  professional background, experience, education  geographic diversity  race  holds  religion  home-state senator (if lower courts)  safe/weak nominee  ideology  scandal  interest group input  senatorial courtesy  issue positions  Part (c): 1 point  One point is earned for correctly explaining how a legislative power serves as a check on court decisions.   Acceptable legislative powers include: amendments impeachment confirmation jurisdiction stripping  congressional funding legislation AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS 2012 SCORING GUIDELINES  Question 3 (continued) Part (d): 1 point One point is earned for correctly explaining how an executive power serves as a check on court decisions.  Acceptable executive powers include: power of appointment executive enforcement  A score of dash (—) is assigned to an answer that is blank. A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is completely off task or is on task but earns no points. AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS 2012 SCORING GUIDELINES  Question 4 6 points Part (a): 2 points One point is earned for each correct description of a technique used by interest groups to influence elections. Techniques include: campaign contributions GOTV efforts candidate ratings independent expenditures endorsements issue ads 501(c)4 PACs 527 providing information on issue and candidates funneling volunteers to campaigns Notes: Must describe a technique, not merely identify it. No double dipping on PACs and Super PACs.  Part (b): 2 points One point is earned for an acceptable explanation that demonstrates how interest groups use issue networks (iron triangles). One point is also earned for an acceptable explanation that demonstrates how interest groups use amicus briefs: • Interest groups participate in issue networks by providing money, information, and resources in hopes of obtaining political support from Congress, the bureaucracy, or the White House.  • Interest groups use amicus briefs to inform the Court in hopes of influencing the acceptance of cases, Court reasoning, or decisions. Part (c): 2 points One point is earned for a correct explanation of how the media acts to limit interest group influence. An additional point is earned for a correct explanation of how pluralism acts to limit interest group influence: • Media can act as a gatekeeper of information or a watchdog of interest group behavior. • Pluralism limits interest group influence because of the competition among a vast number of groups. A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is completely off-task or is on-task but earns no points. A score of dash (—) is assigned to an answer that is blank. 