Question 1  6 points  Part (a): 1 point  One point is earned for making an accurate comparison of  Federalist and Anti-federalist positions.   • The Federalists wanted a stronger national government and weaker state governments, while the Anti-federalists wanted a weaker national government and stronger state government.   • The Federalists wanted a balanced relationship between federal and state governments, while the Anti-federalists wanted a weaker national government and stronger state government.    Part (b): 2 points  One point is earned for each accurate description of a feature of the original Constitution that led to the growth of the national government’s power. Acceptable descriptions include: • Necessary and Proper clause/Elastic clause • Supremacy clause  • Commerce clause • General Welfare clause • Taxing power • Unitary Executive  Part (c): 2 points  One point is earned for an accurate explanation of how each of the following addressed Anti-federalist concerns: • First Amendment – Student must demonstrate knowledge of at least one right in the First Amendment and indicate that the First Amendment protects an individual’s liberty and provides protection from government power. • Tenth Amendment – Student must demonstrate an understanding that powers not mentioned in the Constitution are reserved to the states and people. Question 1 (continued)  Part (d): 1 point  One point is earned for an accurate explanation of how one of the following clauses has altered the balance of power between the state and national governments. • Due Process Clause – Student must demonstrate an understanding that individual protections in the Bill of Rights are applied to the states. Student must indicate that states are compelled to follow national requirements.   • Equal Protection Clause – Student must demonstrate an understanding that the clause protects members of groups from discrimination by states. Student must indicate that states are compelled to follow national requirements.      A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is off task or is attempted but earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is assigned to an answer that is blank.         Question 2  6 points  Part (a): 1 point  One point is earned for an accurate identification of how one of the following amendments affected the electorate: • The Fifteenth Amendment gave African Americans the right to vote. • The Nineteenth Amendment gave women the right to vote. • The Twenty-Sixth Amendment gave citizens age 18 and over the right to vote.  Part (b): 2 points  One point is earned for each explanation of factors that affect voter turnout: • Motor voter laws add more registered voters to the rolls, potentially changing voter turnout. • Photo identification laws create a potential barrier for those without accepted forms of ID, changing voter turnout.  Part (c): 1 point  One point is earned for an accurate description of how one of the following affects the likelihood of a person voting in an election: • Education  Education is positively correlated with voter turnout: The higher the education level of a person, the more likely he or she is to vote. • Age  Age is positively correlated with voter turnout: The older a person is, the more likely he or she is to vote.  Part (d): 2 points  One point is earned for each accurate explanation of why voter turnout differs in the following: • Presidential vs. midterm elections  Media coverage is greater in presidential elections.  Increased interest in and importance of national and presidential campaigns. • Primary vs. general elections  Partisans and activists are more likely to vote in primaries.  Only party members may vote in closed primaries.  Many primary elections are noncompetitive.  Independents are less likely to participate in primary elections.  General elections simplify choices.  Media coverage is greater in general elections.  Increased interest in and importance of general elections.   A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is off task or is attempted but earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is assigned to an answer that is blank.  Question 3  6 points  Part (a): 2 points  One point is earned for each accurate description of an enumerated power that Congress has in making foreign policy. Enumerated powers include:  • Declaring war • Power of the purse • Treaty ratification • Regulating commerce with other nations • Raising and supporting army/navy • Passing laws relative to foreign policy • Defining and punishing offenses against the laws of other nations • Confirming cabinet or administrative appointments: Defense, State, trade reps, etc.   Part (b): 2 points  One point is earned for each description of expressed powers the president has in making foreign policy. Expressed powers include:  • Receiving ambassadors • Appointing ambassadors • Commander-in-Chief • Making treaties • Appointing cabinet officers and administrative agency heads relevant to foreign policy  Part (c): 1 point  One point is earned for an accurate explanation of how executive agreements expand the president’s ability to implement foreign policy: they can be entered into unilaterally (no interference from Congress).  Part (d): 1 point  One point is earned for an accurate explanation of how one of the following limits the president’s ability to implement foreign policy. Accurate explanations include:  • Elections  Elections matter: Presidents must seek re-election; they can be voted out of office after first term; elections can shift agenda or focus.  Midterm elections lead to shifts in partisan makeup of Congress, often to the detriment of the president’s party. • Presidential approval ratings  Lower ratings can lead to perceptions of lesser authority or influence, constraining the president’s freedom to implement foreign policy.   A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is off task or is attempted but earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is assigned to an answer that is blank. Question 4   5 points  Part (a): 1 point  One point is earned for a correct definition of party polarization as increased ideological consistency, divisions along party lines, or both.  Part (b): 1 point  One point is earned for identifying a trend in the graph (e.g., party polarization has increased in the House; is higher in the House than in the Senate over time; was up, then down, then up).  Part (c): 2 points  One point is earned for each accurate description of a cause of party polarization in Congress.  Acceptable causes include:  • Clear issue differences between the parties • Increasing reliance on ideologically-driven activists • Ideologically-driven membership • Gerrymandering • Media effects on politics (e.g., fragmentation of traditional media; consolidation of media ownership; media focus on ideological extremism) • Changing norms in Congress (e.g., lower levels of trust or dislike among members; shorter work week) • Direct primaries – ideological voters in congressional elections • Changing campaign finance rules • Rise of single issue interest groups • Shifts in the party (i.e., Republicans' “Southern Strategy”)  Part (d): 1 point  One point is earned for an accurate description of how party polarization affects Congressional policy making. Acceptable effects include:  • Gridlock (e.g., fewer laws passed; confirmation processes become more difficult; filibuster; greater numbers of vacancies in courts and agencies)  • Lack of compromise (e.g., fewer laws passed; confirmation processes become more difficult; filibuster; greater numbers of vacancies in courts and agencies)   A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is off task or is attempted but earns no points.  A score of dash (—) is assigned to an answer that is blank.         AP® United States Government and Politics 2014 Scoring Guidelines     © 2014 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board.  Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org.                        