2019 AP® United States Government and Politics Scoring Guidelines © 2019 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org. 3 points Part A: 1 point One point is earned for describing an action Congress could take to address the concerns of the interest group in the scenario. • Congress could pass a law that would reverse the Johnson Amendment. • Congress could pass a law to allow religious organizations to participate more directly in politics. Part B: 1 point One point is earned for explaining, in the context of the scenario, how partisan divisions could prevent the action described in part A. • Partisan divisions make it more difficult to pass a law because parties adhere to different ideological points of view. • If Congress and the president are from different political parties, the president might threaten to veto the legislation. Part C: 1 point One point is earned for explaining why the Alliance Defending Freedom might argue that their constitutional rights are threatened by the Johnson Amendment. • The Alliance Defending Freedom and other religious groups might argue that their First Amendment rights are being violated. • The Alliance Defending Freedom and other religious groups might argue that their freedom of speech/religion is being violated. A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is off-task or is attempted but earns no points. A score of NR is assigned to an answer that is blank. 4 points Part A: 1 point One point is earned for identifying the political affiliation of people who are most likely to believe elected officials should compromise. • Democrats Part B: 1 point One point is earned for describing the difference between Democrats and Republicans on their attitudes of whether government officials should stick to their principles, based on the data in the bar graph. • More Republicans compared to Democrats think that government officials should stick to their principles. • 55% of Republicans compared to 34% of Democrats think that government officials should stick to their principles. Part C: 1 point One point is earned for explaining how the data in the bar graph could influence how a Republican candidate would shift his or her campaign positions after securing the Republican nomination for president. • The Republican candidate will likely promise to stick to conservative principles in the primary, but then decide to shift toward compromise in the general election. Part D: 1 point One point is earned for explaining how the data in the bar graph could affect policy making interactions between the president and Congress. • Policy making is easier when the president and Congress are from the same political party/unified government. • Policy making is more difficult when the president and Congress are from different political parties/divided government. • The president or Congress is likely to compromise when making policy to appeal to Democrats/Independents. A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is off-task or is attempted but earns no points. A score of NR is assigned to an answer that is blank. 4 points Part A: 1 point One point is earned for identifying the clause in the Fourteenth Amendment that was used as the basis for the decision in both Brown v. Board of Education and Hernandez v. Texas. • Equal Protection clause Scoring Note: Due Process clause does not earn the point. Part B: 2 points The first point is earned for only describing a relevant fact from the required case. • Brown was about segregated schools/racial discrimination in schools. Scoring Note: The response must be a relevant case fact and NOT the reasoning, decision, or the majority opinion. The second point is earned for correctly explaining how the facts of both cases led to a similar decision. • In Brown, segregated schools led to discrimination against African American students, which was a violation of the Constitution/Equal Protection Clause. In Hernandez, discrimination against Mexican Americans in jury service was found to be a violation of the Constitution/Equal Protection Clause because it led to the conviction of Hernandez by a jury that excluded Mexican Americans. Part C: 1 point One point is earned for explaining how an interest group could use the decision in Hernandez v. Texas to advance its agenda. • An interest group could write amicus curiae briefs to encourage the Court to apply the decision from Hernandez in similar cases. • An interest group could lobby members of Congress to expand civil rights using the Hernandez case. • An interest group could sponsor court cases encouraging the Court to apply the decision in Hernandez. A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is off-task or is attempted but earns no points. A score of NR is assigned to an answer that is blank. Question 4 6 points Row A: Articulate a defensible claim or thesis that responds to the prompt and establishes a line of reasoning.  0 points  1 point Responds to the prompt with a defensible claim or thesis that establishes a line of reasoning.  Decision Rules and Scoring Notes  Responses that do not earn this point:  Responses that earn this point:  • The intended claim or thesis only restates the prompt. • The intended claim or thesis does not make a claim that responds to the prompt. Examples that do not earn this point: Restates the prompt: • “Because of my knowledge of the United States Government, I believe the expanded powers of the national government benefit policy making.” Does not respond to the prompt: • “The federal government has expanded power over time.”  • The claim or thesis responds to the prompt rather than restating or rephrasing the prompt and establishes a line of reasoning. • The response includes a defensible claim or thesis that establishes a line of reasoning about whether the expanded powers of national government benefits or hinders policy making. Examples that earn this point: • “The expanded powers of the national government have made it more efficient, and if states had more power it would be dangerous.” • “The expanded powers of the national government benefit policy making because of the strength of the Constitution, the increase of cooperative federalism, and the advantages of fiscal federalism.”  Additional Notes: • The claim or thesis must consist of one or more sentences that may be located anywhere in the response. • A claim or thesis that meets the criteria can be awarded the point whether or not the rest of the response successfully supports that line of reasoning.  Row B: Support your claim or thesis with at least TWO pieces of accurate and relevant evidence.  0 points  1 point Provides one piece of evidence that is relevant to the topic of the prompt.  2 points Uses one piece of specific and relevant evidence to support the claim or thesis.  3 points Uses two pieces of specific and relevant evidence to support the claim or thesis.  Decision Rules and Scoring Notes  Responses that  Responses that earn  Response that earns 2  Response that earns 3 points:  do not earn  1 point:  points:  points:  • Must provide one  • Must provide one  • Must provide two pieces of specific and relevant  • Do not  piece of evidence  piece of specific and  evidence that support the  provide any  relevant to the topic  relevant evidence  claim or thesis. One of these  accurate  of the prompt  that supports the  pieces of evidence must  evidence  • May or may not  claim or thesis. This  come from a foundational  • Provide  have a claim or  evidence can come  document listed in the  evidence that  thesis  from one of the  prompt. The other piece of  is not  foundational  evidence can come from a  relevant to  documents listed in  different foundational  the topic  the prompt, any other foundational document, or from knowledge of course concepts.  document or from knowledge of course concepts.  Example that earns 2 points: • “The U.S. has already tried giving states more power than the national government, and it has proved to be ineffective. The Articles of Confederation are a prime example of why a strong national government is better. With the Articles, the government could do very little. It made the states more independent by allowing them to have their own currency and impose their own taxes.”  Example that earns 3 points: • “According to Federalist 70, a strong executive benefits the country because it is easier for one person than a group to make decisions, and someone is held accountable.”  Additional Notes: • To earn 2 or 3 points in Row B, the response must have a defensible claim or thesis (earned the point in Row A). • To earn 3 points, the response must use one of the foundational documents listed in the prompt.  Row C: Use reasoning to explain why your evidence supports your claim or thesis.  0 points  1 point Explains how or why the evidence supports the claim or thesis  Decision Rules and Scoring Notes  Responses that do not earn this point:  Response that earns this point:  • Include evidence but offer no reasoning to  • Must explain the relationship between the evidence  connect the evidence to the claim or thesis  provided and the claim or thesis  • Restate the prompt without explaining how  the evidence supports the claim or thesis  Examples that earn this point: • “The Articles of Confederation made it harder to pass laws because each state has very different agendas, and it required over a majority of them to agree. To amend, it required a unanimous decision. This makes it nearly impossible to add a new amendment to change policy.” • “This efficiency and accountability from a strong executive benefits policy making.”  Additional Notes: • To earn this point, the response must have a defensible claim or thesis (earned the point in Row A) and support that argument with at least one piece of specific and relevant evidence (earned at least 2 points in Row B). • The explanation of the relationship between one piece of evidence and the claim or thesis is sufficient to earn this point.  Row D: Respond to an opposing or alternative perspective using refutation, concession, or rebuttal.  0 points  1 point Responds to an opposing or alternate perspective using refutation, concession, or rebuttal  Decision Rules and Scoring Notes  Responses that do not earn this point:  Response that earns this point: • Must describe an alternate perspective AND refute,  • Restate the opposite of the claim or thesis  concede, or rebut that perspective  • May identify or describe an alternate perspective but do not refute, concede, or rebut that perspective • Refute a foundational document rather than an alternate perspective to the provided claim or thesis  Example that earns this point: • “Some people may argue that the federal government is too large, and that states are best suited to address the needs of their people without interference from the federal government. However, this is not true. The state governments are not equipped to handle all of  the problems they face without the federal government. The federal government can act with uniformity to affect all states, to ensure everyone is guaranteed the same protections as everyone else.”  Additional Notes: • To earn this point, the response must have a defensible claim or thesis (earned the point in Row A). • Responses that demonstrate an incorrect understanding of the alternate perspective do not earn this point.  A score of zero (0) is assigned to an answer that is off-task or is attempted but earns no points. A score of NR is assigned to a blank essay. A score of NR cannot be assigned to only one task within the essay. If an NR is assigned, it must be applied to all four tasks. 