AP® Government and Politics: United States 1999 Scoring Guidelines The materials included in these files are intended for non-commercial use by AP teachers for course and exam preparation; permission for any other use must be sought from the Advanced Placement Program. Teachers may reproduce them, in whole or in part, in limited quantities, for face-to-face teaching purposes but may not mass distribute the materials, electronically or otherwise. These materials and any copies made of them may not be resold, and the copyright notices must be retained as they appear here. This permission does not apply to any third-party copyrights contained herein. These materials were produced by Educational Testing Service (ETS), which develops and administers the examinations of the Advanced Placement Program for the College Board. The College Board and Educational Testing Service (ETS) are dedicated to the principle of equal opportunity, and their programs, services, and employment policies are guided by that principle. The College Board is a national nonprofit membership association dedicated to preparing, inspiring, and connecting students to college and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 3,900 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves over three million students and their parents, 22,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges, through major programs and services in college admission, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT™, the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®), and Pacesetter®. The College Board is committed to the principles of equity and excellence, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. Copyright © 2001 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board. AP® GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS: UNITED STATES 1999 SCORING GUIDELINES Question 1 8 total points possible on this question. Two ways MEDIA have contributed to candidate-centered presidential campaigns: 1 point — each identification of a way in which the media have contributed to candidate-centered presidential campaigns (maximum of 2 points) Note: Must be some linkage to candidate-centered campaigns 1 point — explanation of each way in which the media have contributed to candidate-centered presidential campaigns (maximum of 2 points) The following are some acceptable ways that the MEDIA contribute to candidate-centered campaigns: • Coverage of background of candidate • Image-centered coverage/ personality • Talk shows, TV debates • Horserace, reporting polls • Candidate sound bites • De-emphasizing party • Feeding frenzy • Coverage of convention • Investigative reporting/ scandals • Focus on candidate gaffes Two ways presidential CANDIDATES’ use of the media has contributed to candidate-centered campaigns: 1 point — each identification of a way in which the candidates’use of the media has contributed to candidate-centered campaigns (maximum of 2 points) NOTE: Must be some linkage to candidate-centered campaigns 1 point — explanation of each way in which the candidates’use of the media has contributed to candidate-centered campaigns (maximum of 2 points) 1999 SCORING GUIDELINES Question 1 (cont.) The following are some acceptable ways that CANDIDATES' use of the media has contributed to candidate-centered campaigns: • Negative commercials/mudslinging • Attention-getting: public appearances to enhance public attention to individual qualities; timing of candidate activities to make free news coverage • Seeking contributions • Leaking information • Image building : positive ads; hiring consultants; TV debates that focus on individual appearance/qualities; getting on talk shows • Candidate creating choreographed opportunities • Use of Internet to disseminate information • Sound bites Score of zero (0) for relevant attempted answer that earns no points Score of dash (—) for blank or off-task answer . Question 2 7 total points possible on this question. The student must identify the national interest group he/she is discussing. a. 1 point total for a correct identification of a national policymaking institution that the selected group would target • The President • The Legislature (give credit for identifying either the House or the Senate) • The Judiciary • The Bureaucracy or a specific agency If student identifies a specific agency it should be clearly and substantively connected to the interest group, e.g., AARP focuses on Social Security Administration, Medicare portion of HHS, FDA and specific health remedy. AMA might focus on the FDA or the Dept of HHS. NAACP might focus on the Dept. of Justice Civil Rights Division or the EEOC. NAM focuses on FTC, Dept of Commerce, Transportation, Labor (OSHA) Note: Incorrect answer is a non-national institution or non-policymaking institution. b. 3 points total • 1 point for identifying a characteristic or resource of the selected group. All that is required here is an identification of a relevant characteristic or resource of the group. Note: Candidate may receive one point here without earning the point in (a). Question 2 (cont.) • 2 points (maximum) for explaining how the characteristic or resource identified influences the choice of the policymaking institution targeted. No points are awarded if a student did not earn the point in (a) for identifying the targeted institution. 1 point for only a general explanation that provides some linkage of the characteristic or resource to the choice of target institution. 2 points for a specific or full explanation that describes HOW the characteristic or resource influences the choice of target. c. 3 points total • 1 point for identifying a second characteristic or resource of the selected group. All that is required here is an identification of a relevant characteristic or resource of the group. Note: Candidate may receive one point here without earning the point in (a). • 2 points (maximum) for explaining how the second characteristic or resource identified influences the choice of the policymaking institution targeted. No points are awarded if a student did not earn the point in (a) for identifying the targeted institution. 1 point for only a general explanation that provides some linkage of the characteristic or resource to the choice of target institution. 2 points for a specific or full explanation that describes HOW the characteristic or resource influences the choice of target. Score of zero (0) for relevant attempted answer that earns no points Score of dash (—) for blank or off-task answer Question 3 5 total points possible on this question. • 1 point for taking an explicit position: "Yes, Congress is effective," or "No, Congress is not effective," in providing oversight of the bureaucracy. If the writer takes the affirmative (Congress exercises effective oversight): • 2 points (maximum) for a complete explanation of first specific method Congress uses to exercise effective oversight. Award 1 point for a statement showing general understanding of method of oversight. Award 2 points for a specific explanation showing HOW/WHY the method is effective. Methods of effective oversight may include • Budget control • Reauthorization/Jurisdiction of agencies • Setting guidelines for new agencies • Hearings, committee investigations • Power to organize/reorganize agency • “Sunset” legislation • Congressional support agencies-GAO, CBO • Iron triangles as a source of information • Casework as a source of information • Influence over selection of leadership • Program evaluation • 2 points (maximum) for a complete explanation of a second specific method Congress uses to exercise effective oversight. Use the guidelines above for the first method in awarding one or two points for the explanation of the method. If the writer takes the negative (Congress fails to exercise effective oversight): • 2 points (maximum) for a complete explanation of the first reason for this failure. Award 1 point for a statement showing general understanding of why failure occurs. Award 2 points for a specific explanation of how/why the oversight method is not effective. Question 3 (cont.) Reasons for the failure may include • No electoral payoff / Political ramifications • Oversight is labor intensive/ hard work • Lack of technical expertise • Logrolling • Lack of budget control • Enabling legislation is vague • Interest groups/ PACs encourage members to overlook effective administration • Failure to “use” available powers or ineffective use of them • Iron triangles/cozy relationship with agencies • Bureaucratic pathologies (for example, Congress creates opportunities for casework through red tape; firing administrators is difficult) • 2 points (maximum) for complete explanation of the second reason congressional oversight fails. Use the guidelines above for the first reason in awarding one or two points for the explanation of the reason. Notes: • A general discussion of checks and balances is not acceptable and does not receive credit. • If the thesis contradicts the discussion or reasons or explanations, score for the answer that gives the student the most points. Score of zero (0) for relevant attempted answer that earns no points Score of dash (—) for blank or off-task answer AP® GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS: UNITED STATES 1999 SCORING GUIDELINES Question 4 9 total points possible on this question. BUDGETARY BARRIERS First barrier: identification = 1 point • Budgetary barriers are • Entitlements • Interest payments • Limited discretionary spending available • Mandatory spending • Explanation of why barrier persists (2 points maximum) • 1 point if explanation includes only a general discussion of the barrier • 2 points if explanation is complete about WHY the barrier persists Second barrier: identification = 1 point • Budgetary barriers are • Entitlements • Interest payments • Limited discretionary spending available • Mandatory spending • Explanation of why barrier persists (2 points maximum) • 1 point if explanation includes only a general discussion of the barrier • 2 points if explanation is complete about WHY the barrier persists NONBUDGETARY BARRIER Identification of barrier = 1 point • Some possible examples of non-budgetary barriers are AP® GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS: UNITED STATES 1999 SCORING GUIDELINES Question 4 (cont.) • “Not my programs” orientation toward budget cuts or siphoning money to new programs • Interest group influence/competition that maintains status quo • Lack of strong party system • Incremental spending • Budgetary “walls” • Partisanship • Multiple access points for hindering new programs (legislative “process” limitation) • Explanation of how this barrier hinders creation of new policy initiatives (2 points maximum) • 1 point if explanation is only a general discussion of the barrier • 2 points if explanation is complete about HOW this barrier hinders creation of new policy initiatives NOTE: This question does NOT ask for treatment of change over time; therefore, the identification of barriers does NOT require recognition of growth in entitlements or debt service over time. Score of zero (0) for relevant attempted answer that earns no points Score of dash (—) for blank or off-task answer 