AP European History 2000 Scoring Guidelines The materials included in these files are intended for non-commercial use by AP teachers for course and exam preparation; permission for any other use must be sought from the Advanced Placement Program. Teachers may reproduce them, in whole or in part, in limited quantities, for face-to-face teaching purposes but may not mass distribute the materials, electronically or otherwise. These materials and any copies made of them may not be resold, and the copyright notices must be retained as they appear here. This permission does not apply to any third-party copyrights contained herein. These materials were produced by Educational Testing Service (ETS), which develops and administers the examinations of the Advanced Placement Program for the College Board. The College Board and Educational Testing Service (ETS) are dedicated to the principle of equal opportunity, and their programs, services, and employment policies are guided by that principle. The College Board is a national nonprofit membership association dedicated to preparing, inspiring, and connecting students to college and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 3,900 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves over three million students and their parents, 22,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges, through major programs and services in college admission, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT™, the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®), and Pacesetter®. The College Board is committed to the principles of equity and excellence, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. Copyright © 2001 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board. Question 1 BASIC CORE (1 point each to a total of 6 points) 1 Point. Has acceptable thesis. An acceptable thesis is based on the documents and addresses itself appropriately to the purposes served by rituals/festivals. One purpose permissible if more are shown later in the essay. Thesis may come at end. 1 Point. Uses a majority of documents. Uses at least 6 documents by explicit reference to information in the document/attribution (i.e., anything in the box). Documents need not be cited by number. 1 Point. Supports thesis with appropriate evidence from the documents. NOTE: Even when there is no thesis, the essay still can offer evidence from the documents relating rituals/festivals to purposes, earning a point. Must discuss at least four festivals (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6) and/or rituals (1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10); AND Must relate the purpose of the ritual/festival to its activity, as for example: •to reinforce values by their reversal or upsetting them (2, 3, 4, 6) •to release tensions for a short time (2, 3, 4, 5) •to impose social controls ritually (6, 7, 8, 9, 10) •for youth to mimic elders either positively or negatively (1, 7) •to keep women in line (8, 10) \to keep men in line (7, 9) •to provide mechanisms for social and/or political protest (4, 7) 1 Point. Understands the basic meaning of documents cited in the essay. (May misinterpret one document.) In discussing documents, must interpret at least four documents correctly with no more than one major error in the interpretation of the content of a document. A major misinterpretation is one that leads to an inaccurate grouping and/or a false conclusion. 1 Point. Analyzes bias or point of view in at least two documents or attributes authorship consistently. •Relates authorial point of view to author’s place in society; •OR Evaluates the reliability of a source; •OR Groups documents in a way that explicitly and correctly shows awareness of POV; •OR Recognizes that different kinds of documents serve different purposes or analyzes intent or “tone” of documents. •OR: Repeatedly uses attribution in almost all references to documents used (minimum 6). 1 Point. Analyzes documents by grouping them in at least 3 ways. A fallacious grouping (e.g., nationalism) receives no credit. Some acceptable groupings [with appropriate docs]: •Purposes [see point 3 above] •Carnival/Shrove Tuesday [3, 4, 5] •Religious [2, 3, 4, 5] •Charivari [7, 8, 9, 10] •Residual paganism [2, 3, 6] •Unusual or inappropriate behavior [2, 3, 4, 6, 7] •Rituals designed to control deviant behavior [7, 8, 9, 10] •“Gendered” rituals [1, 6, 7, 8, 9] •Age-specific rituals (e.g. young people) [1, 4, 6, 7] •“Shaming” rituals [7, 8, 9, 10] •Political purpose [1, 7] •Pro-con; favoring the rituals [1, 5, 6] or opposing the rituals [2, 4, 7] •English [4, 6, 8, 9] vs. non-English documents •Chronological groupings Depending on the argument used, D-1 may stand alone as civic ritual and D-7 as traditional ritual turned political. EXPANDED CORE (1 to 3 points to a total of 9 points) Expands beyond the basic score of 1 to 6 points. A student must earn 6 points in the basic core area before earning points in the expanded area. A student earns points to the degree to which he or she does some or all of the following: 0-3 Points (9 max.) •Has a clear, analytical and comprehensive thesis. •Uses all or almost all documents. •Uses documents persuasively as evidence. •Shows careful and insightful analysis of the documents. •Analyzes bias or point of view in at least four documents cited in the essay (valued highly in this DBQ). •Analyzes the documents in additional ways-additional groupings or other forms of analysis. •Has a well-organized essay. •Brings in relevant “outside” historical content. Question 2 9 - 8 - 7 - 6: STRONGER ESSAYS These essays will illustrate the following qualities with varying degrees of effectiveness: 1. Has a clear, well-developed thesis. 2. Is well-organized. 3. Supports the thesis with specific evidence. 4. May contain minor errors; even a "9" need not be flawless. Indicators An 8/9 essay •Provides a developed, balanced treatment of Stalin's and Gorbachev's political and economic policies; should discuss similarities as well as differences (may have more emphasis on the latter). •Analyzes motives for and/or results of these policies. A 6/7 essay •Discusses the contrasts between Stalin's and Gorbachev's political and economic policies, but the similarities may be implicit. •Recognizes motives for and/or results of these policies. 5 - 4: MIXED ESSAYS 1. Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic. 2. Responds to terms of question unevenly: task(s), evidence, chronology. 3. May contain errors, factual and/or interpretive. Indicators •May discuss Stalin’s and Gorbachev’s political and economic policies unevenly. •May mention similarities, but focuses primarily on differences. •Provides a mere narrative with limited recognition of motives or results of policies. •Contains little factual evidence. 3 - 2 - 1 - 0: WEAKER ESSAYS These essays demonstrate the following qualities to varying degrees. Essays scored "0" or "1" may attempt to address the question but fail to do so: 1. Thesis confused, unfocused, or absent, or simply restates the question. 2. Misconstrues the question, or omits major tasks. 3. May contain major errors. Indicators •May exclude one of the four categories (political, economic, Stalin, Gorbachev). •Contains mostly generalizations unsupported by factual evidence. •May have glaring errors of fact and/or interpretation. •Fails to address the question (e.g., lacking comparisons, lacking analysis, off-task chronologically, etc.) Question 3 STRONGER ESSAYS 9 •Develops a clear thesis generally in a balanced fashion •Links leadership motives/goals/style as ruler to consequences •Uses appropriate examples to connect leadership motives/goals and consequences •Clearly connects how leadership decisions affected Spain’s fate/experience over time •May have a major error and/or irrelevant information, but not enough to seriously undermine the essay 8 •Develops a thesis with occasional imbalance or lack of clarity •Links leadership motive(s)/goal(s)/style as ruler to consequences, some implicitly •Uses appropriate examples that connect motive(s)/goal(s)/consequences, sometimes implicitly •Awareness of how leadership decisions affected Spain’s fate/experience over time •May have a few major errors and/or irrelevant data, but not enough to seriously undermine the essay 7 •Develops a thesis with occasional imbalance and lack of clarity •Links leadership motive(s)/goal(s)/style as ruler to consequences, often implicitly •Properly develops most examples to connect motive(s)/goal(s) and consequences, often implicitly •Some awareness of how leadership decisions affected Spain’s fate/experience over time •Unevenness in the overall development of the essay due to major errors and/or irrelevant data 6 •Develops a thesis that may have occasional imbalance or lack of clarity •Links leadership motive(s)/goals(s)/style as ruler to consequences, with some unevenness •Uneven but basically correct development of examples to connect motive(s)/goal(s) and consequence(s) I •mplicit awareness of how leadership decisions affected Spain’s fate/experience over time •One part of the essay may be fundamentally flawed due to major errors and/or irrelevant data MIXED ESSAYS 5 •Develops a thesis that may be very general and largely implicit •More proper than improper linkages between leadership motive(s)/goal(s)/style as ruler and consequences •Several examples, most properly developed, to connect motive(s)/goal(s) and consequences •Considers how leadership decisions affected Spain’s fate/experience in a perfunctory fashion over time •Some parts of the essay are fundamentally flawed due to major errors and/or irrelevant data 4 •Offers a thesis that may be very general and largely implicit •More improper than proper linkages between leadership motive(s)/goal(s)/style as ruler and consequence(s) •Several examples, at least one properly developed, to connect motive(s)/goal(s) and consequence(s) •Considers how leadership decisions affected Spain’s fate/experience in a perfunctory fashion over time •Much of the essay is fundamentally flawed due to major errors and/or irrelevant data WEAKER ESSAYS 3 •Offers a vague thesis or simply a restatement of the question •Very weak, often improper linkages between leadership motive(s)/goal(s)/style as ruler and consequence(s) •Several weakly developed examples to connect motive(s)/goal(s) and consequence(s) •Only passing consideration of how leadership decisions affected Spain’s fate/experience over time E •ssay is fundamentally flawed due to major errors and/or inadequate/irrelevant data 2 •Offers a vague thesis or simply a restatement of the question •Makes little effort to link leadership motive(s)/goal(s)/style as ruler and consequence(s) •One or two very poorly developed example to connect motive(s)/goal(s) and consequence(s) •Little consideration of how leadership decisions affected Spain’s fate/experience over time •Essay is fundamentally flawed due to major errors and/or inadequate/irrelevant data 1 •At best only restates the question •Makes no effort to link leadership motive(s)/goal(s)/style as ruler and consequence(s) •At best, one very poorly developed example to connect motive(s)/goal(s) and consequence(s) •Asserts but fails to demonstrate at all how leadership decisions affected Spain’s fate/experience over time •Paucity of pertinent information fundamentally limits the effectiveness of the essay 0 •At best only restates the question •Makes no effort to link leadership motive(s)/goal(s)/style as ruler and consequence(s) •Cites no examples that properly connect motive(s)/goal(s) and consequence(s) •Fails to tie to Spain’s fate/experience over time •Paucity of pertinent information fundamentally limits the effectiveness of the essay Question 4 9 - 8 - 7 - 6: STRONGER ESSAYS These essays will illustrate the following qualities with varying degrees of effectiveness: Standards 1. Will have a clear, well defined thesis 2. Well-organized 3. Analyzes and discusses all parts of the question 4. May have minor errors Indicators •Discusses three appropriate developments; better essays(8/9) will identify distinct categories •Gives specific examples for each of the developments •Links information with a more balanced presentation •Chronological focus is accurate but not necessarily sequential 5 - 4: MIXED ESSAYS Standards 1. Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic 2. Addresses issue unevenly 3. Offers limited analysis/discussion 4. May contain errors, factual and/or interpretive Indicators •Includes three developments, but may focus primarily on one •Gives limited or inadequate examples for development •Unbalanced presentation •Chronological focus may be uneven 3 - 2 - 1 - 0: WEAKER ESSAYS These essays will demonstrate the following qualities with varying degrees: Standards 1. Thesis minimal 2. May discuss issues with little or no analysis 3. May contain major errors Indicators •Simply restates question or misconstrue question •May include three developments, but lacks specific examples •Lacks awareness of chronological framework Question 5 9 – 8 – 7 – 6: STRONGER ESSAYS Essays in this category will illustrate the following qualities in varying degrees of effectiveness: Standards 1. has a clear well developed thesis 2. well organized 3. addresses the terms of the question: tasks, content, chronology — perhaps with some unevenness 4. supports the thesis with specific evidence 5. even a "9" need not be flawless Indicators: 9 – 8 •Gives accurate definitions or descriptions for Enlightenment assumptions of human behavior and the role of reason. (behavior and reason may be conflated) •Develops the ideas of Darwin and Freud that are relevant. •Demonstrates explicitly how these ideas challenge those of the Enlightenment. Indicators: 7 – 6 •Definitions or descriptions of Enlightenment, assumptions of human behavior and reason less well -eveloped or somewhat more implicit. •Ideas of Darwin and Freud relevant but may have less clarity. •Challenges to Enlightened views may be less clear or only implicit. 5 – 4: MIXED ESSAYS Standards 1. Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic 2. Responds to the terms of the question unevenly: tasks, evidence, chronology 3. may contain errors, factual and/or interpretive Indicators: •Definitions or descriptions of Enlightenment assumptions of human behavior and role of reason are often simplistic, limited, or vague. •Ideas of Darwin and Freud are less relevant or more weakly demonstrated. •Unbalanced, (e.g. may be stronger on Darwin or Freud). •Minimal linkage. 3 – 2 – 1 – 0: WEAKER ESSAYS Essays in the category will demonstrate the following qualities to varying degrees. Essays scored "0" or "1" may attempt to answer the question bur fail to do so. Standards: 1. Thesis confused, unfocused, or absent, or simply restates the question 2. Misconstrues the question, or omits major tasks 3. May contain major errors Indicators: •Definitions or descriptions of Enlightenment assumptions of human behavior and the role of reason are often limited, erroneous, or missing. •Ideas of Darwin and Freud are poorly stated, undeveloped and may not be linked to the Enlightenment. •References to Darwin and Freud are irrelevant to the question. Question 6 9 – 8 – 7 – 6: STRONGER ESSAYS Essays will have most of the following qualities with varying degrees of effectiveness: Higher-Level Essays (9 – 8) 9 A clear, well-developed thesis (may be implicit) Demonstrates some examples of historical context (e.g., social, economic, political, or ideological) 8 Critical analysis of poem Accurately distinguishes between early and late 19th century and gender roles May contain minor errors, or a single major error; even a "9" need not be flawless Lower-Level Essays  (7 – 6) 7 A clear thesis (may be implicit) Superficial treatment of historical context (may include only one aspect of social, economic, political or ideological) 6 Addresses accuracy of the poem; either agrees or disagrees General discussion of gender roles May conflate early and late 19th century; some inaccuracies or anachronisms May contain a number of errors, minor or major 5 – 4: MIXED ESSAYS 5 Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic Uses historical evidence, either specifically or through allusions 4 Refers to poem, often uncritically Little or no differentiation between gender roles Is likely to confuse preindustrial era, first and second industrial revolutions Implies historical awareness, not always accurate; may contain significant errors 3 – 2 – 1 – 0: WEAKER ESSAYS Higher-Level Essays (3 – 2) 3 Thesis uncritical Minimal historical evidence; substantial anachronisms 2 Uncritical acceptance of poem May be primarily polemical, editorial or may omit discussion of gender roles May contain numerous major errors Lower-Level Essays  (1 – 0) 1 Thesis confused, unfocused, or inaccurate No historical evidence 0 May reiterate poem line-by-line May be polemical May contain numerous egregious errors "— " NON-RESPONSIVE ESSAYS Response totally off-task, absent, or irrelevant. May be assigned by any reader, after checking all pages of essay booklet for a scorable response. Question 7 9 – 8 – 7 – 6: STRONGER ESSAYS Essays will have most of the following qualities with varying degrees of effectiveness: Stronger Essays – Higher Level (9 – 8) 9 A clear, well-developed thesis (may be implicit) Demonstrates relevant knowledge of scientific method in the seventeenth century 8 Identifies explicit ways in which scientific thinking had an impact on traditional sources of authority Supports the thesis with appropriate evidence May contain minor errors, or a single major error; even a "9" need not be flawless Stronger Essays – Lower Level (7 – 6) 7 A clear thesis (may be implicit) Demonstrates some knowledge of scientific method in the seventeenth century 6 Includes some analysis of the impact of scientific thinking on traditional sources of authority Supports the thesis with evidence May contain a number of errors, minor or major 5 – 4: MIXED ESSAYS 5 Contains a thesis, perhaps superficial or simplistic Includes a superficial discussion of the scientific method in the seventeenth century 4 Mentions impact of scientific thinking on traditional sources of authority with little analysis Contains adequate or marginal supporting evidence May contain significant errors 3 – 2 – 1 – 0: WEAKER ESSAYS Essays will demonstrate the following qualities to varying degrees. Essays scored "0" or "1" may attempt to address the question, but fail to do so: Weaker Essays – Higher Level (3 – 2) 3 Weak thesis Refers minimally to scientific method in the seventeenth century 2 May be primarily polemical or partially off-task; little or no reference to impact on authority Includes minimal concrete evidence May contain a number of major errors Weaker Essays – Lower Level (1 – 0) 1 Thesis confused and unfocused Refers vaguely to scientific method in the seventeenth century 0 May be merely polemical and partially off-task; may omit discussion of impact on authority Evidence irrelevant or missing May contain a number of glaring errors "— " NON-RESPONSIVE ESSAYS Response totally off-task, absent, or irrelevant. May be assigned by any reader, after checking all pages of essay booklet for a scorable response. 