AP® United States Government and Politics 2006 Free-Response Questions The College Board: Connecting Students to College Success The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 5,000 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves seven million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. College Board, AP Central, APCD, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Vertical Teams, Pre-AP, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. Admitted Class Evaluation Service, CollegeEd, connect to college success, MyRoad, SAT Professional Development, SAT Readiness Program, and Setting the Cornerstones are trademarks owned by the College Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Board and National Merit Scholarship Corporation. All other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.com.  FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS SECTION II Time—1 hour and 40 minutes Directions:  You have 100 minutes to answer all four of the following questions. Unless the directions indicate otherwise, respond to all parts of all four questions. It is suggested that you take a few minutes to plan and outline each answer. Spend approximately one-fourth of your time (25 minutes) on each question. In your response, use substantive examples where appropriate. Make certain to number each of your answers as the question is numbered below. 1. While interest groups and political parties each play a significant role in the United States political system, they differ in their fundamental goals. (a) Identify the fundamental goal of interest groups in the political process. (b) Identify the fundamental goal of major political parties in the political process. (c) Describe two different ways by which interest groups support the fundamental goal of political parties in the political process. (d) For one of the forms of support you described in (c), explain two different ways in which that form  of support helps interest groups to achieve their fundamental goal in the political process. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 2  FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS SOCIAL SECURITY RECEIPTS, SPENDING, AND RESERVE ESTIMATES, 2001–2035 Source:  2001 OASDI Trustees Report 2. In recent decades, entitlement programs have constituted a substantial portion of the United States federal budget. Social Security is the largest entitlement program in the United States. From the information in the chart above and your knowledge of United States government and politics, perform the following tasks. (a) Define entitlement program. (b) What is the primary source of revenue for the Social Security program? (c) Identify one threat to the future of the Social Security program should the trends depicted  in the chart above continue. (d) Describe one demographic trend that threatens the future of the Social Security program AND explain how it is responsible for the threat that you identified in (c). (e) Explain how any one of the trends in the chart above would change if the age of eligibility for Social Security were raised. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 3 3. The United States Congress and the President together have the power to enact federal law. Federal bureaucratic agencies have the responsibility to execute federal law. However, in the carrying out of these laws, federal agencies have policy-making discretion. (a) Explain two reasons why Congress gives federal agencies policy-making discretion in executing  federal laws. (b) Choose one of the bureaucratic agencies listed below. Identify the policy area over which it exercises policy-making discretion AND give one specific example of how it exercises that discretion. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Federal Reserve Board (c) Describe two ways in which Congress ensures that federal agencies follow legislative intent. 4. The framers of the United States Constitution created a legislative system that is bicameral. However, it is not just bicameral; the framers also established two houses of distinctly different character and authority. (a) Discuss two reasons why the framers created a bicameral legislature. (b) Identify one power unique to the House of Representatives and explain why the framers gave the House  that power. (c) Identify one power unique to the Senate and explain why the framers gave the Senate that power. STOP END OF EXAM © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 4 