AP® United States Government and Politics 2007 Free-Response Questions The College Board: Connecting Students to College Success The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 5,000 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves seven million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. © 2007 The College Board. All rights reserved. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Board and National Merit Scholarship Corporation.  Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.com. 2007 AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS SECTION II Time—1 hour and 40 minutes Directions:  You have 100 minutes to answer all four of the following questions. Unless the directions indicate otherwise, respond to all parts of all four questions. It is suggested that you take a few minutes to plan and outline each answer. Spend approximately one-fourth of your time (25 minutes) on each question. In your response, use substantive examples where appropriate. Make certain to number each of your answers as the question is numbered below. 1. A significant feature of the electoral college is that most states have a winner-take-all system. (a) Describe the winner-take-all feature of the electoral college. (b) Explain one way in which the winner-take-all feature of the electoral college affects how presidential candidates from the two major political parties run their campaigns. (c) Explain one way in which the winner-take-all feature of the electoral college hinders third-party candidates. (d) Explain two reasons why the electoral college has not been abolished. 2. The First Amendment includes two clauses relating to the freedom of religion. (a) Select one of the following cases and identify the First Amendment clause upon which the United States Supreme Court based its decision. • Engel v. Vitale (school prayer) • Lemon v. Kurtzman (state funding for private religious schools) (b) Describe the Supreme Court’s decision in the case that you selected in (a). (c) Select one of the following cases and identify the First Amendment clause upon which the Supreme Court based its decision. • Reynolds v. United States (polygamy) • Oregon v. Smith (drug use in religious ceremonies) (d) Describe the Supreme Court’s decision in the case that you selected in (c). (e) Many of these decisions have caused controversy in the United States. Describe two ways in which other  political institutions might limit the impact of Supreme Court decisions. © 2007 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -2- 2007 AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 3. Conflicts between Congress and the President over war powers have their origin in the United States Constitution. In 1973 Congress passed the War Powers Resolution in an attempt to clarify the balance of powers between the two branches of government. (a) Describe the primary constitutional conflict between Congress and the President over the decision to go  to war. (b) Describe two provisions of the War Powers Resolution that were designed to limit the President’s power over war making. (c) The War Powers Resolution has received mixed reviews, but Congress has other powers over war making. Other than the constitutional power that you described in (a), identify and explain two other formal powers Congress has over war making. 4. The framers of the United States Constitution created a federal system. (a) Define federalism. (b) Select two of the following and explain how each has been used to increase the power of the federal government relative to the states. • Categorical grants • Federal mandates • Selective incorporation (c) Select two of the following and explain how each has been used to increase the power of the states relative to the federal government. • Welfare Reform Act of 1996 • Block grants • Tenth Amendment STOP END OF EXAM © 2007 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). -3- 