AP_logo_K.jpgAP® United States Government and Politics 2013 Free-Response Questions About the College Board The College Board is a mission-driven not-for-profit organization that connects students to college success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the College Board was created to expand access to higher education. Today, the membership association is made up of more than 6,000 of the world’s leading educational institutions and is dedicated to promoting excellence and equity in education. Each year, the College Board helps more than seven million students prepare for a successful transition to college through programs and services in college readiness and college success — including the SAT® and the Advanced Placement Program®. The organization also serves the education community through research and advocacy on behalf of students, educators, and schools. © 2013 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. Admitted Class Evaluation Service and inspiring minds are trademarks owned by the College Board. All other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: www.collegeboard.org/inquiry/cbpermit.html. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org. CBLogoK_high2013 AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS SECTION II Time—1 hour and 40 minutes Directions:  You have 100 minutes to answer all four of the following questions. Unless the directions indicate otherwise, respond to all parts of all four questions. It is suggested that you take a few minutes to plan and outline each answer. Spend approximately one-fourth of your time (25 minutes) on each question. In your response, use substantive examples where appropriate.  1. There are several different approaches to representation within a democratic political system. (a) Define direct democracy. (b) Define republican form of government. (c) Describe one reason the framers of the United States Constitution chose a republican form of government over a direct democracy. (d) Describe each of the models of congressional representation. x Trustee model (attitudinal view) x Delegate model (representational view) (e) Explain why a member of Congress might sometimes act as a trustee (attitudinal view) rather than a delegate (representational view). 2. Political parties play important roles in United States elections and government institutions. Over the past several decades, the influence of political parties in elections has declined while their strength in Congress has increased. (a) Describe two important functions of political parties in United States elections.  (b) Describe one important role political parties play within Congress to promote the party’s public policy agenda. (c) Explain how each of the following factors has weakened the influence of political parties over the political process.  Direct primaries  Candidate-centered campaigns (d) Explain how party polarization has strengthened party influence in Congress. © 2013 The College Board. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -2-2013 AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS PRESIDENTIAL APPOINTMENTS TO THE FEDERAL JUDICIARY BY SELECTED DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS, 2000–2011 (in percent)  President  African American  Hispanic  Asian American  White  Women  Men  Barack Obama  22%  11%  8%  59%  46%  54%  George W. Bush  7%  9%  1%  82%  22%  78%  Source: Alliance for Justice, August 2011 Percentages do not add up to 100. 3. Presidents consider many factors when nominating candidates to the federal courts, and getting their nominees confirmed is often difficult. (a) Using the chart above, describe ONE similarity between President Barack Obama’s judicial appointments and those made by President George W. Bush. (b) Using the chart above, describe TWO differences between President Barack Obama’s judicial appointments and those made by President George W. Bush. (c) Explain why a president’s party affiliation accounts for differences in presidential appointments to the judiciary. (d) Describe one way a president can increase the chances of having judicial nominations to federal courts confirmed. 4. The public policy process is complex. The formation, enactment, and implementation of public policy involve many government institutions. (a) Explain the importance of each of the following in the formation of the policy agenda.   Media  Elections (b) Describe the roles of each of the following in the enactment of public policy.  Congressional committees  Executive orders (c) Explain the importance of each of the following in the implementation of public policy.  Bureaucratic discretion x Issue networks OR iron triangles STOP END OF EXAM © 2013 The College Board. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. -3-