The test preparation materials  in this document include images for which descriptions are provided. In a standard test, the images are presented without descriptions. In this document, descriptions are included with the images so that assistive technology users will have an understanding of what is in each image. However, some of the image descriptions may not be valid for testing purposes; and in certain cases we cannot make all of the content accessible due to the construct or design of particular test questions.  Therefore, on an actual test in an alternate format, some questions may be omitted if they include images that cannot be described without affecting the question’s validity. If any questions are omitted, the scoring rules for the test take such omissions into account to make sure that you are neither advantaged nor disadvantaged by the omissions and that your scores are comparable to those of individuals taking another version of the test.A P logoAP® United States Government and Politics 2014 Free-Response Questions © 2014 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo
 are registered trademarks of the College Board.
 Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.<BR> AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org.<BR> College Board logoUNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS SECTION II Time—1 hour and 40 minutes Directions:  You have 100 minutes to answer all four of the following questions. Unless the directions indicate otherwise, respond to all parts of all four questions. It is suggested that you take a few minutes to plan and outline each answer. Spend approximately one-fourth of your time (25 minutes) on each question. In your response, use substantive examples where appropriate.   1. The United States Constitution’s ratification resulted from a political process that required compromise between the Federalists and Anti-Federalists. Many of the debates in government today continue to reflect the concerns of each perspective. (a) Compare the positions of Federalists and Anti-Federalists regarding the power of the national government.  (b) Describe two features of the original Constitution that have led to a growth in the power of the national government.  (c) Explain how each of the following additions to the Constitution addressed Anti-Federalist concerns. First AmendmentTenth Amendment (d) Explain how one of the following clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment has altered the balance of power between the state and national governments. Due process clause Equal protection clause   2. Voter turnout is influenced by constitutional provisions, voting laws, and demographics. (a) Identify the effect of one of the following amendments on the electorate. Fifteenth Amendment Nineteenth Amendment Twenty-sixth Amendment (b) Explain how each of the following factors may affect voter turnout. Motor voter laws Photo identification laws (c) Select one of the following demographic features and describe its relationship to the likelihood of a person voting in an election. Education Age (d) Explain why voter turnout is different in each of the following. Presidential versus midterm elections Primary versus general elections  3. Congress and the president both have a role in making foreign policy. Despite recent expansions in presidential power, there are still limits on presidential decision making in foreign policy.  (a) Describe two enumerated powers Congress has in making foreign policy. (b) Describe two expressed powers the president has in making foreign policy. (c) Explain how executive agreements expand the president’s ability to implement foreign policy.  (d) Explain how one of the following can limit the president’s ability to implement foreign policy. Elections Presidential approval ratings The figure shows a graph titled PARTY POLARIZATION, 1879 TO 2007. Along the horizontal axis are equally spaced tickmarks showing, from left to right, every 8 years from 1879 to 2007. The vertical axis is labeled Ideological Distance Between the Parties, and there are equally spaced tickmarks , from bottom to top,  ranging from zero  to 1 . 

There are two data curves on the graph, one for the House and one for the Senate. The House curve begins at approximately zero point seven  five on the vertical axis in 1879,  has an overall increase until it reaches approximately zero point nine around1903, decreases to about zero point four five from around 1935 to 1950, and then increases to one point zero by 2007.

The Senate curve begins  above the House curve, at approximately zero point eight  on the vertical axis in 1879. The Senate curve has an overall decrease until it reaches approximately zero point three around 1937, and then has an overall increase until it ends,  at approximately zero point eight in 2007. 
 4. (a) Define party polarization.  (b) Identify a trend shown in the graph above. (c) Describe two causes of party polarization in Congress. (d) Describe one effect of party polarization on congressional policy making. STOP END OF EXAM © 2014 The College Board. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 