The test preparation materials  in this document include images for which descriptions are provided. In a standard test, the images are presented without descriptions. In this document, descriptions are included with the images so that assistive technology users will have an understanding of what is in each image. However, some of the image descriptions may not be valid for testing purposes; and in certain cases we cannot make all of the content accessible due to the construct or design of particular test questions.  Therefore, on an actual test in an alternate format, some questions may be omitted if they include images that cannot be described without affecting the question’s validity. If any questions are omitted, the scoring rules for the test take such omissions into account to make sure that you are neither advantaged nor disadvantaged by the omissions and that your scores are comparable to those of individuals taking another version of the test.A P logo AP® United States Government and Politics   2016 Free-Response Questions © 2016 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board.  Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org. The College Board logoUNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS SECTION II Time—1 hour and 40 minutes Directions:  You have 100 minutes to answer all four of the following questions. Unless the directions indicate otherwise, respond to all parts of all four questions. It is suggested that you take a few minutes to plan and outline each answer. Spend approximately one-fourth of your time (25 minutes) on each question. In your response, use substantive examples where appropriate.  1.Linkage institutions—such as political parties, the media, and interest groups—connect citizens to thegovernment and play significant roles in the electoral process.(a) Describe one important function of political parties as a linkage institution in elections.(b) Describe the influence of the media on the electoral process in each of the following roles.Gatekeeping/agenda settingScorekeeping/horse race journalism(c) Describe two strategies interest groups use to influence the electoral process. (d) Explain how, according to critics, interest groups may limit representative democracy. The figure shows a bar graph titled, United States Population By Select Demographic Characteristics. The years 1980, 2000, 2010, and 2050 appear from left to right on the horizontal axis.  The vertical axis is labeled Percentage of Population.  The labels zero, 20 percent, 40 percent, 60 percent, 80 percent, and 100 percent appear from bottom to top on the vertical axis.  There are horizontal lines at each of these labels that extend across the graph.
At each year, there is a cluster of 4 bars.  The bars are approximately as follows, from left to right.
1980: Non-Hispanic White, 82 percent; Hispanic, 5 percent; African American, 12 percent; Asian American, 2 percent.
2000: Non-Hispanic White, 68 percent; Hispanic, 14 percent; African American, 12 percent; Asian American, 4 percent.
2010: Non-Hispanic White, 62 percent; Hispanic, 17 percent; African American, 14 percent; Asian American, 5 percent.
2050: Non-Hispanic White, 48 percent; Hispanic, 30 percent; African American, 14 percent; Asian American, 10 percent.
*Note: 2050 projections are based on data from the U.S. Census Bureau2.The United States is experiencing a dramatic change in the makeup of its population. These changes havepolitical consequences for political institutions.(a) Identify a trend depicted in the chart.(b) Assuming that recent voting patterns continue, explain how the trend identified in (a) is likely to affect theelectoral success of either the Democratic Party or the Republican Party. (c) Explain how the demographic changes shown in the chart above are likely to affect the way in which parties operate in Congress. (d) Describe two specific actions that presidents can take to respond to the demographic changes in the chart above. 3.The public policy process involves interactions between Congress and the bureaucracy.(a) Identify the primary role of Congress in the policy process.(b) Explain how divided party control of Congress can make the policy process difficult.(c) Identify the primary role of the bureaucracy in the policy process.(d) Explain how one of the following increases the power of the bureaucracy in the policy process.Rule makingBureaucratic discretion(e) Explain how each of the following enables Congress to limit the power of the bureaucracy. Oversight hearingsPower of the purse4.The Constitution limited the power of the national government and restricted popular control; however, citizenparticipation has changed over time.(a) Explain how each of the following constitutional features protects against the concentration of power in thenational government. Checks and balancesFederalism(b) Explain how one of the following features of the Constitution limited the people’s ability to influence the national government. Electoral collegeSelection of senators before the Seventeenth Amendment(c) Describe a constitutional amendment that increased suffrage. (d) Describe the effect of one of the following laws on citizen participation in elections. Voting Rights Act of 1965National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (Motor Voter Act)STOP END OF EXAM 