2000 Advanced Placement Program® Free-Response Questions The materials included in these files are intended for use by AP® teachers for course and exam preparation in the classroom; permission for any other use must be sought from the Advanced Placement Program. Teachers may reproduce them, in whole or in part, in limited quantities, for face-to-face teaching purposes but may not mass distribute the materials, electronically or otherwise. These materials and any copies made of them may not be resold, and the copyright notices must be retained as they appear here. This permission does not apply to any third-party copyrights contained herein. These materials were produced by Educational Testing Service (ETS), which develops and administers the examinations of the Advanced Placement Program for the College Board. The College Board and Educational Testing Service (ETS) are dedicated to the principle of equal opportunity,  and their programs, services, and employment policies are guided by that principle. The College Board is a national nonprofit membership association dedicated to preparing, inspiring, and connecting students to college and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 3,800 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves over three million students and their parents, 22,000 high schools, and 5,000 colleges, through major programs and services in college admission, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®), and Pacesetter®. The College Board is committed to the principles of equity and excellence, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. Copyright © 2000 by College Entrance Examination Board and Educational Testing Service. All rights reserved. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board. 2000 AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS SECTION II Time—100 minutes Directions:  You have 100 minutes to answer all four of the following questions. It is suggested that you take a few minutes to plan and outline each answer.Spend approximately one-fourth of your time (25 minutes) on each question. Illustrate your essay with substantive examples where appropriate. Make certain to number each of your answers as the question is numbered below. 1. The Constitution was an attempt to address problems of decentralization that were experienced under the Articles of Confederation. (a) List three problems of decentralized power that existed under the Articles of Confederation. For each problem you listed, identify one solution that the Constitution provided to address the problem. (b) Some have argued that the tensions between decentralized and centralized power continue to exist. Support this argument by explaining how one of the following illustrates the continuing tension. • Environmental policy • Gun control • Disability access 2. The Supreme Court is commonly thought to be “above politics.” However, one can argue that the appointment of Supreme Court justices is political. (a) Identify three characteristics of Supreme Court nominees and discuss how each characteristic has been politically relevant during the appointment process. (b) Identify two methods that have been used by interest groups to influence the appointment process. Explain how each of these methods has been used to influence that process. 3. The figure below displays voting patterns by state in the 1992 and 1996 presidential elections. Using the information in the figure and your knowledge of United States voting behavior, perform the following tasks. (a) Using the map below, identify one of the numbered regions with strong support for the Democratic presidential candidate and identify and explain two factors that contribute to that support. (b) Using the map below, identify one of the numbered regions with strong support for the Republican presidential candidate and identify and explain two factors that contribute to that support. Copyright © 2000 College Entrance Examination Board and Educational Testing Service. All rights reserved. AP is a registered trademark of the College Entrance Examination Board. -2GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 2000 AP® UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 4. The three obstacles listed below have made it difficult for Congress to enact significant campaign finance reform. • Buckley v. Valeo (1976) • Soft money • Incumbency Select two of the obstacles. For each obstacle, provide both of the following. (a) A brief description of the obstacle (b) An explanation of how the obstacle has made it difficult for Congress to enact significant campaign finance reform END OF EXAMINATION Copyright © 2000 College Entrance Examination Board and Educational Testing Service. All rights reserved. AP is a registered trademark of the College Entrance Examination Board. -3