AP® United States History 2007 Free-Response Questions The College Board: Connecting Students to College Success The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 5,000 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves seven million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. © 2007 The College Board. All rights reserved. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Board and National Merit Scholarship Corporation.  Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.com. UNITED STATES HISTORY SECTION II Part A (Suggested writing time—45 minutes) Percent of Section II score—45 Directions:  The following question requires you to construct a coherent essay that integrates your interpretation of Documents A-J and your knowledge of the period referred to in the question. High scores will be earned only by essays that both cite key pieces of evidence from the documents and draw on outside knowledge of the period. 1. Analyze the ways in which technology, government policy, and economic conditions changed American agriculture in the period 1865–1900. In your answer be sure to evaluate farmers’ responses to these changes. Document A Agricultural Prices in Dollars per Unit, 1865–1900 Source:  Historical Statistics of the United States Wheat  Cotton  Corn  Year  Price per Bushel  Millions of Bushels Produced  Price per Pound  1,000 Bales Produced  Price per Bushel  Millions of Bushels Produced  1865  2.16  NA  .83  2,094  NA  NA  1870  1.04  254  .24  4,352  .52  1,125  1875  1.01  314  .15  4,631  .42  1,450  1880  .95  502  .12  6,606  .39  1,707  1885  .77  400  .11  6,576  .32  2,058  1890  .84  449  .11  8,653  .50  1,650  1895  .51  542  .07  7,162  .25  2,535  1900  .62  599  .10  10,124  .35  2,662  © 2007 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -2- Document B © 2007 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -3- Document C Source:  Prairie Farmer, July 14, 1877. Our western brothers have accomplished one great good by their war upon the railroads. Some time ago they carried a law through the Illinois legislature, which provides for the limiting of freight rates by a board of officials appointed for this purpose. The railroads, of course, opposed this measure, and it was carried to the United States Supreme Court to test its constitutionality, resulting in a complete victory for the Patrons. Illinois is the only state in the country to have such laws. Document D © 2007 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -4- Document E Source:  A contract in North Carolina, 1882 To every one applying to rent land upon shares, the following conditions must be read, and agreed to . . .  The sale of every cropper’s part of the cotton to be made by me when and where I choose to sell, and after deducting all they owe me and all sums that I may be responsible for on their accounts, to pay them their half of the net proceeds. Document F Source:  Harper’s New Monthly Magazine, 1884 An establishment in Chicago which combines the operations of “shipping” and of “canning” beef has a slaughtering capacity of 400,000 head annually. When we add to  this the requirements of other similar although smaller concerns, and the large number shipped eastward on the hoof, we have a grand total of not far from 2,500,000 head marketed in the city of Chicago alone . . . Whence does it come? Let the five great trunk lines which have their termini on the borders of Lake Michigan answer. Like the outstretched fingers of a hand, they meet in the central palm, Chicago. All from the West, but from the extreme northern and southern portions, Texas representing the latter, and the utmost limits of Montana the former. Ten thousand miles of rail at least are occupied in th[is] transit . . . Document G Source:  Speech by Mary Elizabeth Lease, 1892 Money rules . . . The parties lie to us and the political speakers mislead us. We were told two years ago to go to work and raise a big crop that was all we needed. We went to work and plowed and planted; the rains fell, the sun shone, nature smiled, and we raised the big crop that they told us to; and what came of it? Eight-cent corn, ten-cent oats, two-cent beef, and no price at all for butter and eggs—that’s what came of it. Then the politicians said we suffered from overproduction. Overproduction, when 10,000 little children, so statistics tell us, starve to death every year in the United States. © 2007 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -5- Document H Source:  In Kansas, Susan Orcutt to Lorenzo D. Lewelling, June 29, 1894. I take my Pen In hand to let you know that we are Starving to death It is Pretty hard to do without any thing to eat in this God for saken country we would have had Plenty to Eat if the hail hadent cut our rye down and ruined our corn and Potatoes I had the Prettiest Garden that you Ever seen and the hail ruined It and I have nothing to look at my Husband went a way to find work and came home last night and told me that we would have to Starve he has bin in ten countys and did not Get no work It is Pretty hard for a woman to do with out any thing to Eat Document I Source:  R. W. McAdams, Oklahoma Magazine, 1894 Many of the country’s most profound students of the Indian question—men and women who have made the race and its relation to the nation a life study—have become converts to the policy of individualism and severalty. The citizenship question aside, the folly and injustice of reserving many millions of acres of arable land as a wilderness used only as a camping ground for a few thousand lazy, squalid governmental paupers is palpable. If the Indians must be fed and herded like a dumb brute, it should be done with smaller enclosures and not so senselessly at the expense of the American homesteader. Document J Source:  Excerpts from a speech by William Jennings Bryan, July 1896 You come to us and tell us that the great cities are in favor of the gold standard. I tell you that the great cities rest upon these broad and fertile prairies. Burn down your cities and leave our farms, and your cities will spring up again as if by magic. But destroy our farms and the grass will grow in the streets of every city in the country. If they dare to come out in the open field and defend the gold standard as a good thing, we shall fight them to the uttermost, having behind us the producing masses of the nation and the world. Having behind us the commercial interests and the laboring interests and all the toiling masses, we shall answer their demands for a gold standard by saying to them, you shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns. You shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold. END OF DOCUMENTS FOR QUESTION 1 © 2007 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -6- UNITED STATES HISTORY SECTION II Part B and Part C (Suggested total planning and writing time—70 minutes) Percent of Section II score—55 Part B Directions:  Choose ONE question from this part. You are advised to spend 5 minutes planning and 30 minutes writing your answer. Cite relevant historical evidence in support of your generalizations and present your arguments clearly and logically. 2. Settlers in the eighteenth-century American backcountry sometimes resorted to violent protest to express their grievances. Analyze the causes and significance of TWO of the following: March of the Paxton Boys  Regulator movement  Shays’ Rebellion  Whiskey Rebellion 3. In what ways did the Second Great Awakening in the North influence TWO of the following?  Abolitionism  Temperance The cult of domesticity  Utopian communities © 2007 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. -7- Part C Directions:  Choose ONE question from this part. You are advised to spend 5 minutes planning and 30 minutes writing your answer. Cite relevant historical evidence in support of your generalizations and present your arguments clearly and logically. 4. To what extent did the role of the federal government change under President Theodore Roosevelt in regard to TWO of the following. Labor  Trusts  Conservation  World affairs 5. “Landslide presidential victories do not ensure continued political effectiveness or legislative success.” Assess the validity of this statement by comparing TWO of the following presidential administrations. Franklin Roosevelt (1936)  Lyndon Johnson (1964) Richard Nixon (1972)  Ronald Reagan (1984) STOP END OF EXAM © 2007 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). -8- 