AP® European History 2006 Free-Response Questions The College Board: Connecting Students to College Success The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 5,000 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves seven million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. College Board, AP Central, APCD, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Vertical Teams, Pre-AP, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. Admitted Class Evaluation Service, CollegeEd, connect to college success, MyRoad, SAT Professional Development, SAT Readiness Program, and Setting the Cornerstones are trademarks owned by the College Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Board and National Merit Scholarship Corporation. All other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.com. EUROPEAN HISTORY SECTION II Part A (Suggested writing time—45 minutes) Percent of Section II score—45 Directions:  The following question is based on the accompanying Documents 1-12. The documents have been edited for the purpose of this exercise. Write your answer on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet. This question is designed to test your ability to work with and understand historical documents. Write an essay that: • Provides an appropriate, explicitly stated thesis that directly addresses all parts of the question and does NOT simply restate the question. • Discusses a majority of the documents individually and specifically. • Demonstrates understanding of the basic meaning of a majority of the documents. • Supports the thesis with appropriate interpretations of a majority of the documents. • Analyzes the documents by explicitly grouping them in at least three appropriate ways.  • Takes into account both the sources of the documents and the authors’ points of view. You may refer to relevant historical information not mentioned in the documents. 1. How did Europeans perceive the role of organized sports in Europe during the period  from 1860 to 1940 ? Historical Background:  In Europe after 1870, organized sports grew in popularity as  leisure time expanded. Rules for football (also called soccer), the most popular and  international of team sports, were standardized by 1860. In the late 1800’s, numerous  national sports associations and clubs were founded across Europe. Reflecting the rise  in international sports competition, the modern Olympic Games were established in  1896 in Athens. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. Document 1 Source: Miroslav Tyrs, commemorative speech as cofounder, annual meeting, Czech National Gymnastics Organization, Prague, 1863. Our work is difficult and our task sacred. We must create a new race, hardier than its predecessors. Combining a strong body with a strong will, we will once again unite the dovelike meekness of the Slav with the falcon-like boldness of more glorious times. This new race will not depend on foreigners for its rights. Rather by defending its own in days of storm and stress, this new race will create an unbreachable defense on which the assaults of our foes will be shattered. Document 2 Source: Extracts from the Czech National Gymnastics Organization official publication,  The Czech Falcon, 1865–1912. THE CZECH FALCON NATIONAL GYMNASTICS ORGANIZATION 1865–1912 Year  Number of Clubs  Membership  1865  19  1,712  1875  72  7,191  1883  105  11,197  1888  171  19,817  1897  466  43,870  1902  605  50,238  1905  671  52,169  1910*  916  95,077  *1910:  Women (14,585) were counted as part of the total for the first time. Document 3 Source: Sir Robert Baden-Powell, founder of the Boy Scouts, Scouting for Boys, London, 1908. Football [soccer] in itself is a grand game for developing a lad physically and morally, for he learns to play with good temper and unselfishness, to play in his place and “play the game”  and these are the best of training for any game of life. But it is a vicious game when it draws crowds of lads away from playing the game themselves to be merely onlookers at a few paid performers. There are thousands of boys and young men, pale, narrow-chested, hunched up, miserable specimens, smoking endless cigarettes, numbers of them betting, all of them learning to be hysterical as they groan and cheer in panic along with their neighbors. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 3 Document 4 Source: African delegate of a British colony to African Political Association, speech, “A Sound Mind in a Sound Body,” Cape Town, South Africa, 1910. Great moral lessons can be learned on the cricket and rugby fields—two forms of sport of which our people are passionately fond. In a rugby game the players sometimes pack into one inseparable whole, called a scrum, and press forward with a regular rhythmic movement and a steadiness of purpose. There is perfect union. Passing is accurate and well timed; finally, there is a complete subordination of self. Our young men are good cricketers, but poor rugby players. In cricket, individual excellence often wins the game, while the result of a rugby match depends much more on union and combination. As on the rugby field, so in the battle of life. We lack union: we refuse to combine. Document 5 Source: Martin Berner, Berlin journalist, “The Olympic Idea in the World,” Soccer, Track and Field Journal, Berlin, 1913. The Olympic Games are a war, a real war. You can be sure that many participants are willing to offer—without hesitation—several years of their lives for a victory of the fatherland. The Olympic idea of the modern era has given us a symbol of world war, which does not show its military character very openly, but—for those who can read sports statistics—it gives enough insight into world ranking. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 4 Document 6 © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. Document 7 Source: M. Fauré-Dujarric, “Practical Organization of a Sports Society,” Paris Encyclopedia of Sports, Paris, 1924. The young sportsman, having arrived at the age of maturity, rediscovers in the struggles of life all the emotions, all the drama that he has known, all the victories that he has won on the green fields that were the theater of his youthful escapades. As then, so now, the focus of interest gathers around some ball that he must grasp firmly so that he can take it from the reach of his opponents’ desire!  Whether we like it or not, the law of national solidarity will make us dependent upon our fellow citizens, who make up the great national team of which we are obliged to be members. Document 8 Source: Nikolai Semashko, physician and first Soviet Health Minister, “Tenth Anniversary of Soviet Medicine in Physical Education,” Theory and Practice of Physical Education, Moscow, 1928. Physical culture in the Soviet understanding of the term is concerned not with record breaking, but with people’s physical health. It is an integral part of the cultural revolution and therefore has personal and social hygiene as its major objective, teaching people to use the forces of nature—the sun, air, and water—the best proletarian doctors. Document 9 Source: Y. Mihashi, Japanese traveler, account of a high school gymnastics exhibition in Ollerup, Denmark, unpublished article, Tokyo, 1930. People became completely carried away. The sun shone and was reflected by the muscular, sweating bodies, who looked like statues come alive, moving with an unbelievable living rhythm. The unity of the animated responses of the gymnasts is difficult to describe in words. The time passed so quickly that more than an hour of instruction seemed like a mere moment. Suddenly, one heard voices raised in song and the gymnasts circled like victorious warriors, bearing the Danish flag before them. They symbolized happiness itself, and the applause of tens of thousands of spectators knew no limits. We were all in ecstasy. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 6 Document 10 Source: Alice Profe, German physician, “Recent Observations regarding the Physical Education of Women,” Railroad Exercise and Sports Newspaper, Berlin, 1930. There is no muscle which is built and works in a female fashion and which reacts in a special manner to the exertion of physical exercises; there is no female blood, no female breathing, which makes the female particularly suitable for swinging movements. None of these claims has a scientific basis. Just as women do not eat differently from men to gain strength, neither do they need different exercises from men to achieve a strengthening of their bodies. Document 11 Source: British National Workers Sports Association, “Peace Through Sport,” Fifth Annual Report, Cardiff, Wales, 1935. The high standard of play and sportsmanship shown by the players, both Continental and English, made me feel sorry that such international matches are not held more frequently. It serves to show that the cause of Peace can be best achieved by the friendly rivalry between our Continental Brothers and ourselves on the Sports Field. When the Working Class of the World know one another better, and fraternize more freely, it will be much easier to talk Peace and infinitely harder for capitalists and Dictators to stir up nations to war against each other. Document 12 Source: Ingeborg Schrer, Swedish gymnast, autobiography recalling the beginning of Swedish gymnastics in the 1880’s, published in 1940. For the young girls of today, it will certainly be impossible to imagine the wonderful pleasure of putting on a gymnastics costume in which one could move freely, though the sleeves were long and the frock went down below the knees. This dress was still regarded as improper, and many years were to pass before we could do our exercises in the open air. But how beautiful it was to feel one’s strength growing from arm exercises on the horizontal bar, from climbing the rope and from those many wonderful vaults that required courage and agility. END OF PART A © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). EUROPEAN HISTORY SECTION II Part B (Suggested planning and writing time—35 minutes) Percent of Section II score—27 1/2 Directions: You are to answer ONE question from the three questions below. Make your selection carefully, choosing the question that you are best prepared to answer thoroughly in the time permitted. You should spend  5 minutes organizing or outlining your answer. Write your answer to the question on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet, making sure to indicate the question you are answering by writing the appropriate question number at the top of each page. Write an essay that: • Has a relevant thesis. • Addresses all parts of the question. • Supports thesis with specific evidence. • Is well organized. 2. Compare and contrast the relationship between the artist and society in the Renaissance/Reformation period to the relationship between the artist and society in the late nineteenth century. 3. Analyze the aims, methods, and degree of success of the Catholic Reformation (Counter-Reformation) in the sixteenth century. 4. Analyze the effects of the Columbian exchange (the interchange of plants, animals,  and diseases between the Old World and the New World) on the population and economy of Europe in the period 1550 to 1700. © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. EUROPEAN HISTORY SECTION II Part C (Suggested planning and writing time—35 minutes) Percent of Section II score—27 1/2 Directions: You are to answer ONE question from the three questions below. Make your selection carefully, choosing the question that you are best prepared to answer thoroughly in the time permitted. You should spend  5 minutes organizing or outlining your answer. Write your answer to the question on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet, making sure to indicate the question you are answering by writing the appropriate question number at the top of each page. Write an essay that: • Has a relevant thesis. • Addresses all parts of the question. • Supports thesis with specific evidence. • Is well organized. 5. Compare and contrast the social and economic roles of the state in seventeenth- and  eighteenth-century Europe (before 1789) to the social and economic roles of the state  in Europe after the Second World War. 6. In the period 1815-1900, political liberalization progressed much further in western  Europe than in Russia. Analyze the social and economic reasons for this difference. 7. Considering the period 1933 to 1945, analyze the economic, diplomatic, and military  reasons for Germany’s defeat in the Second World War. STOP END OF EXAM © 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 